household furniture and utensils on the carts and prepared to go to
Vrndavana. All the old men of the village , the children and women were
arranged on seats, and the cowherd men equipped themselves with bows
and arrows to follow the carts. All the cows and bulls along with their
calves were placed in the front , and the men surrounded the flocks with
their bows and arrows and began to blow on their horns and bugles. In this
way, with tu multuous sound , they started for Vrndavana.
And who can describe the damsels of Vraj a? They were all seated on the
carts and were very beautifully dressed with ornaments and costly saris.
They began to chant the pastimes of child Kr§ a as usual. Mother Y asoda
and mother Rohi i were seated on a separate cart , and Kr§ a and Balarama
were seated on their laps. · While mother Rohi i and Y asoda were riding
on the cart, they talked to Kf§l)a and Balarama, and feeling the pleasure of
such talks, they looked very, very beautiful.
In this way, after reaching V rndavana, where everyone lives eternally,
very peacefully and happily, they encircled Vrndavana and kept the carts
all together. After seeing the beautiful appearance of Govardhana on the
Killing the Demons V atsasura and Bakasura 77
bank of the River Yamuna, they began to construct their places of
residence. While those of the same age were walking together and children
were talking with their parents, the inhabitants of Vrndavana felt very
happy.
At this time K[ l).a and Balarama were given charge of the calves. The
first responsibility of the cowherd boys was to take care of the little calves.
The boys are trained in this from the very beginning of their childhood. So
along with other little cowherd boys, K[ l).a and Balarama went into the
pasturing ground and took charge of the calves and played with Their
playmates. While taking charge of the calves, sometimes the two brothers
played on Their flutes. And sometimes They played with iimalaki:fruits and
bael fruits, just like small children play with balls. Sometimes They danced
and made tinkling sounds with Their ankle bells. Sometimes They made
Themselves into bulls and cows by covering Themselves with blankets.
Thus K[ l).a and Balarama played. The two brothers also used to imitate
the sounds of bulls and cows and play at bullfighting. Sometimes They used
to imitate the sounds of various animals and birds. In this way, They en
joyed Their childhood pastimes apparently like ordinary, mundane children.
Once, when K[ l).a and Balarama were playing on the bank of the
Yamuna, a demon of the name Vatsasura assumed the shape of a calf and
came there intending to kill the brothers. By taking the shape of a calf,
the demon could mingle with other calves. Kr va, however, specifically
noticed this, and He immediately told Balarama about the entrance of the
demon. Both brothers then followed him and sneaked u p upon him. K[ l).a
caught hold of the demon-calf by the two hind legs and tail, whipped him
around very forcibly and threw him up into a tree. The demon lost his life
and fell down from the top of the tree to the ground. When the demon
lay dead on the ground, all the playmates of K[ l).a congratulated Him,
"Well done, well done," and the demigods in the sky began to shower
flowers with great satisfaction. In this way, the maintainers of the com
plete creation, K[ l).a and Balarama, used to take care of the calves in the
morning every day, and thus They enjoyed Their childhood pastimes as
cowherd boys in v rndavana.
All the cowherd boys would daily go to the bank of the River Yamuna
to water their calves. Usually, when the calves drank water from the
Yam una, the boys also drank. One day, after drinking, when they were
sitting on the bank of the river, they saw a huge animal which looked
something like a duck and was as big as a hill. Its top was as strong as a
thunderbolt. When they saw that unusual animal, they became afraid of it.
The name of this beast was Bakasura, and he was a friend of Kamsa's. He
78 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appeared on the scene suddenly and immediately attacked Kr 11a with his
pointed, sharp beaks and quickly swallowed Him up. When Kr  a was
thus swallowed, all the boys, headed by Balarama, became almost breath
less, as if they had died. But when the Bakasura demon was swall owing
up Kr  a, he felt a burning fiery sensation in his throat. This was due to
the glowing effulgence of Kr  ta. The demon quickly threw Krwa up and
tried to kill Him by pinching Him in his beaks. Bakasura did not know
that although Kr tla was playing the part of a child of Nanda Maharaja,
He was still the original father of Lord Brahma, the creator of the universe.
The child of mother Y asoda, who is the reservoir of pleasure for the demi
gods and who is the maintainer of saintly persons, caught hold of the
beaks of the great gigantic duck and, before His cowherd boy friends ,
bifurcated his mouth, just as a child very easily splits a , blade of grass.
From the sky, the denizens of the heavenly planets showered flowers like
the cameli, the most fragrant of all flowers, as a token of their congratula
tions. Accompanying the showers of flowers was a vibration of bugles,
drums and conchshells.
When the boys saw the showering of flowers and heard the celestial
sounds, they became struck with wonder. When they saw Kr va, they all,
including Balarama, were so pleased that it seemed as if they had regained
their very source of life. As soon as they saw Kr 11a coming towards them,
they one after another embraced the son of N anda and held Him to their
chests. After this, they assembled all the calves under their charge and
began to return home.
When they arrived home, they began to speak of the wonderful activities
of the son of Nanda. When the gopis and cowherd men all heard the story
from the boys, they felt great happiness because naturally they loved
Kr va, and hearing about His glories and victorious activities, they became
still more affectionate toward Him. Thinking that the child Kr  a was
saved from the mouth of death, they began to see His face with great love
and affection. They were full of anxieties, but they could not turn their
faces from the vision of Kr J1a. The gopis and the men began to converse
amongst themselves about how the child Kr  a was attacked in so many
ways and so many times by so many demons, and yet the demons were
killed and Kr  a was uninjured. They continued to converse amongst
themselves about how so many great demons in such fierce bodies attacked
Kn a to kill Him, but by the grace of Hari, they could not cause even a
slight injury. Rather, they died like small flies in a fire. Thus they remem
bered the words of Gargamuni who foretold, by dint of his vast knowledge
of the Vedas and astrology, that this boy would be attacked by many
Killing the Demons V atsasura and Bakasura 79
demons. Now they actually saw that this was coming true, word for word.
All the elderly cowherd men, including Nanda Maharaja, used to talk of
the wonderful activities of Lord Kf l).a and Balarama, and they were
always so much absorbed in those talks that they forgot the threefold