"Krsna the Supreme Personality of Godhead" 
by His Divine Grace A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada. 
 
COPYRIGHT NOTICE: 
 
This is an evaluation copy of the printed version of this book, and is NOT FOR 
RESALE. This evaluation copy is intended for personal non-commercial use only, 
under the "fair use" guidelines established by international copyright laws. You 
may use this electronic file to evaluate the printed version of this book, for your 
own private use, or for short excerpts used in academic works, research, student 
papers, presentations, and the like. You can distribute this evaluation copy to 
others over the Internet, so long as you keep this copyright information intact and 
do not add or subtract anything to this file and its contents. You may not reproduce 
more than ten percent (10%) of this book in any medium without the express 
written permission from the copyright holders. 
 
Reference any excerpts in the following way: “Excerpted from “Krsna the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead” by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, 
courtesy of the Bhaktivedanta Book Trust International, www.krishna.com.” 
 
This book and electronic file is Copyright 1972-2004 Bhaktivedanta Book Trust 
International, 3764 Watseka Avenue, Los Angeles, California 90034, USA. All 
rights reserved. For any questions, comments, correspondence, or to evaluate 
dozens of other books in this collection, visit the website of the publishers, 
www.krishna.com. 
 
Kåñëa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead 
Volume 1 
By His Divine Grace 
AC Bhaktivedanta Swami 
Prabhupada 
This is volume one of a 
three book set. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
2
Dedication by  
AC Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada 
 
To My Father, Gour Mohan De  (1849-1930) 
 
A pure devotee of Kåñëa, who raised me as a Kåñëa concious child 
from the beginning of my life. In my boyhood ages he instructed 
me how to play the mådanga. He gave me Rädhä-Kåñëa Vigraha to 
worship, and he gave me Jagannätha-Ratha to duly observe the 
festival as my childhood play. He was kind to me, and I imbibed 
from him the ideas later on solidified by my spiritual master, the 
eternal father. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
3
 
Words from Apple  
George Harrison 
 
Everybody is looking for Kåñëa. 
Some don't realize that they are, but they are. 
KÅÑËA is GOD, the source of all that exists, the Cause of all that is, 
was, or ever will be. 
As GOD is unlimited, HE has many Names. 
Allah-Buddha-Jehova-Rama: ALL are KÅÑËA, all are ONE. 
God is not abstract; He has both the impersonal and the personal GOD 
is abstract; He has both the impersonal and the personal aspects to His 
personality which is SUPREME, ETERNAL, BLISSFUL, and full of 
KNOWLEDGE. As a single drop of water has the same qualities as an 
ocean of water, so has our consciousness the qualities of GOD'S 
consciousness … but through our identification and attachment with 
material energy (physical body, sense pleasures, material possessions, ego, 
etc.) our true TRANSCENDENTAL CONSCIOUSNESS has been 
polluted, and like a dirty mirror it is unable to reflect a pure image. 
With many lives our association with the TEMPORARY has grown. 
This impermanent body, a bag of bones and flesh, is mistaken for our 
true self, and we have accepted this temporary condition to be final. 
Through all ages, great SAINTS have remained as living proof that this 
non-temporary, permanent state of GOD CONSCIOUSNESS can be 
revived in all living Souls. Each soul is potentially divine. 
Kåñëa says in Bhagavad Gita: "Steady in the Self, being freed from all 
material contamination, the yogi achieves the highest perfectional stage 
of happiness in touch with the Supreme Consciousness." (VI, 28) 
YOGA (a scientific method for GOD (SELF) realization) is the process 
by which we purify our consciousness, stop further pollution, and arrive 
at the state of Perfection, full KNOWLEDGE, full BLISS. 
If there's a God, I want to see Him. It's pointless to believe in something 
without proof, and Kåñëa Consciousness and meditation are methods 
where you can actually obtain GOD perception. You can actually see 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
4
God, and hear Him, play with Him. It might sound crazy, but He is 
actually there, actually with you. 
There are many yogic Paths-Raja, Jnana, Hatha, Kriya, Karma, Bhakti-
which are all acclaimed by the MASTERS of each method. 
SWAMI BHAKTIVEDANTA is as his title says, a BHAKTI Yogi 
following the path of DEVOTION. By serving GOD through each 
thought, word and DEED, and by chanting HIS Holy Names, the 
devotee quickly develops God-consciousness. By chanting  
Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa  
Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare 
Hare Räma, Hare Räma 
Räma Räma, Hare Hare 
One inevitable arrives at KÅÑËA Consciousness. (The proof of the 
pudding is in the eating!) 
I request that you take advantage of this book KÅÑËA, and enter into 
its understanding. I also request that you make an appointment to meet 
your God now, through the self liberating process of YOGA (UNION) 
and GIVE PEACE A CHANCE. 
 
(hand written) 
All you need is Love (Krishna)  Hari Bol. 
George Harrison  31/3/70 
 
Apple Corps Ltd 3 Savile Row London W1 Gerrard 2771/3993 Telex Apcore 
London 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
5
Preface 
nivåtta-tarñair upagéyamänäd 
bhavauñadhäc chrotra-mano-’bhirämät 
ka uttamaçloka-guëänuvädät 
pumän virajyeta vinä paçu-ghnät 
(Çrémad-Bhägavatam 10.1.4) 
 
In the Western countries, when someone sees the cover of a book like 
Kåñëa, he immediately asks, “Who is Kåñëa? Who is the girl with Kåñëa?” 
etc. 
The immediate answer is that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. How is that? Because He conforms in exact detail to 
descriptions of the Supreme Being, the Godhead. In other words, Kåñëa 
is the Godhead because He is all-attractive. Outside the principle of all-
attraction, there is no meaning to the word Godhead. How is it one can 
be all-attractive? First of all, if one is very wealthy, if he has great riches, 
he becomes attractive to the people in general. Similarly, if someone is 
very powerful, he also becomes attractive, and if someone is very famous, 
he also becomes attractive, and if someone is very beautiful or wise or 
unattached to all kinds of possessions, he also becomes attractive. So 
from practical experience we can observe that one is attractive due to 
(1) wealth, (2) power, (3) fame, (4) beauty, (5) wisdom and (6) 
renunciation. One who is in possession of all six of these opulences at 
the same time, who possesses them to an unlimited degree, is understood 
to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. These opulences of the 
Godhead are delineated by Paräçara Muni, a great Vedic authority. 
We have seen many rich persons, many powerful persons, many famous 
persons, many beautiful persons, many learned and scholarly persons, 
and persons in the renounced order of life unattached to material 
possessions. But we have never seen any one person who is unlimitedly 
and simultaneously wealthy, powerful, famous, beautiful, wise and 
unattached, like Kåñëa, in the history of humanity. Kåñëa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, is a historical person who appeared on this 
earth 5,000 years ago. He stayed on this earth for 125 years and played 
exactly like a human being, but His activities were unparalleled. From 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
6
the very moment of His appearance to the moment of His 
disappearance, every one of His activities is unparalleled in the history 
of the world, and therefore anyone who knows what we mean by 
Godhead will accept Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. No 
one is equal to the Godhead, and no one is greater than Him. That is the 
import of the familiar saying “God is great.” 
There are various classes of men in the world who speak of God in 
different ways, but according to the Vedic literature and according to 
the great äcäryas, the authorized persons versed in the knowledge of 
God in all ages, like äcäryas Çaìkara, Rämänuja, Madhva, Viñëusvämé, 
Lord Caitanya and all their followers by disciplic succession, all 
unanimously agree that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
As far as we, the followers of Vedic civilization, are concerned, we 
accept the Vedic history of the whole universe, which consists of 
different planetary systems called Svargalokas, or the higher planetary 
system, Martyalokas, or the intermediary planetary system, and 
Pätälalokas, or the lower planetary system. The modern historians of this 
earth cannot supply historical evidences of events that occurred before 
5,000 years ago, and the anthropologists say that 40,000 years ago Homo 
sapiens had not appeared on this planet because evolution had not 
reached that point. But the Vedic histories, the Puräëas and 
Mahäbhärata, relate human histories which extend millions and billions 
of years into the past. 
For example, from these scriptures we are given the histories of Kåñëa’s 
appearances and disappearances millions and billions of years ago. In the 
Fourth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä Kåñëa tells Arjuna that both He 
and Arjuna had had many births before and that He (Kåñëa) could 
remember all of them and that Arjuna could not. This illustrates the 
difference between the knowledge of Kåñëa and that of Arjuna. Arjuna 
might have been a very great warrior, a well-cultured member of the 
Kuru dynasty, but after all, he was an ordinary human being, whereas 
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the possessor of 
unlimited knowledge. Because He possesses unlimited knowledge, Kåñëa 
has a memory that is boundless. 
Kåñëa’s knowledge is so perfect that He remembers all the incidents of 
His appearances some millions and billions of years in the past, but 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
7
Arjuna’s memory and knowledge are limited by time and space, for he is 
an ordinary human being. In the Fourth Chapter Kåñëa states that He 
can remember instructing the lessons of the Bhagavad-gétä some millions 
of years ago to the sun-god, Vivasvän. 
Nowadays it is the fashion of the atheistic class of men to try to become 
God by following some mystic process. Generally the atheists claim to be 
God by dint of their imagination or their meditational prowess. Kåñëa is 
not that kind of God. He does not become God by manufacturing some 
mystic process of meditation, nor does He become God by undergoing 
the severe austerities of the mystic yogic exercises. Properly speaking, He 
never becomes God because He is the Godhead in all circumstances. 
Within the prison of His maternal uncle Kaàsa, where His father and 
mother were confined, Kåñëa appeared outside His mother’s body as the 
four-handed Viñëu-Näräyaëa. Then He turned Himself into a baby and 
told His father to carry Him to the house of Nanda Mahäräja and his 
wife Yaçodä. When Kåñëa was just a small baby the gigantic demoness 
Pütanä attempted to kill Him, but when He sucked her breast He pulled 
out her life. That is the difference between the real Godhead and a God 
manufactured in the mystic factory. Kåñëa had no chance to practice the 
mystic yoga process, yet He manifested Himself as the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead at every step, from infancy to childhood, from 
childhood to boyhood, and from boyhood to young manhood. In this 
book, Kåñëa, all of His activities as a human being are described. 
Although Kåñëa plays like a human being, He always maintains His 
identity as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Since Kåñëa is all-attractive, one should know that all his desires should 
be focused on Kåñëa. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the individual 
person is the proprietor or master of his own body but that Kåñëa, who is 
the Supersoul present in everyone’s heart, is the supreme proprietor and 
supreme master of each and every individual body. As such, if we 
concentrate our loving propensities upon Kåñëa only, then immediately 
universal love, unity and tranquillity will be automatically realized. 
When one waters the root of a tree, he automatically waters the 
branches, twigs, leaves and flowers; when one supplies food to the 
stomach through the mouth, he satisfies all the various parts of the body. 
The art of focusing one’s attention on the Supreme and giving one’s love 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
8
to Him is called Kåñëa consciousness. We have inaugurated the Kåñëa 
consciousness movement so that everyone can satisfy his propensity for 
loving others simply by directing his love towards Kåñëa. The whole 
world is very anxious to satisfy the dormant propensity of love for 
others, but the various invented methods like socialism, communism, 
altruism, humanitarianism and nationalism, along with whatever else 
may be manufactured for the peace and prosperity of the world, are all 
useless and frustrating because of our gross ignorance of the art of loving 
Kåñëa. Generally people think that by advancing the cause of moral 
principles and religious rites they will be happy. Others may think that 
happiness can be achieved by economic development, and yet others 
think that simply by sense gratification they will be happy. But the real 
fact is that people can be happy only by loving Kåñëa. 
Kåñëa can perfectly reciprocate one’s loving propensities in different 
relationships called mellows, or rasas. Basically there are twelve loving 
relationships. One can love Kåñëa as the supreme unknown, as the 
supreme master, the supreme friend, the supreme child, the supreme 
lover. These are the five basic love rasas. One can also love Kåñëa 
indirectly in seven different relationships, which are apparently 
different from the five primary relationships. All in all, however, if one 
simply reposes his dormant loving propensity in Kåñëa, then his life 
becomes successful. This is not a fiction but is a fact that can be realized 
by practical application. One can directly perceive the effects that love 
for Kåñëa has on his life. 
In the Ninth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä this science of Kåñëa 
consciousness is called the king of all knowledge, the king of all 
confidential things, and the supreme science of transcendental 
realization. Yet we can directly experience the results of this science of 
Kåñëa consciousness because it is very easy to practice and is very 
pleasurable. Whatever percentage of Kåñëa consciousness we can 
perform will become an eternal asset to our life, for it is imperishable in 
all circumstances. It has now been actually proved that today’s confused 
and frustrated younger generation in the Western countries can directly 
perceive the results of channeling the loving propensity toward Kåñëa 
alone. 
It is said that although one executes severe austerities, penances and 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
9
sacrifices in his life, if he fails to awaken his dormant love for Kåñëa, 
then all his penances are to be considered useless. On the other hand, if 
one has awakened his dormant love for Kåñëa, then what is the use in 
executing austerities and penances unnecessarily? 
The Kåñëa consciousness movement is the unique gift of Lord Caitanya 
to the fallen souls of this age. It is a very simple method which has 
actually been carried out during the last four years in the Western 
countries, and there is no doubt that this movement can satisfy the 
dormant loving propensities of humanity. This book, Kåñëa, is another 
presentation to help the Kåñëa consciousness movement in the Western 
world. This transcendental work of literature is published with profuse 
illustrations. People love to read various kinds of fiction to spend their 
time and energy. Now this tendency can be directed to Kåñëa. The result 
will be the imperishable satisfaction of the soul, both individually and 
collectively. 
It is said in the Bhagavad-gétä that even a little effort expended on the 
path of Kåñëa consciousness can save one from the greatest danger. 
Hundreds of thousands of examples can be cited of people who have 
escaped the greatest dangers of life due to a slight advancement in Kåñëa 
consciousness. We therefore request everyone to take advantage of this 
great transcendental literary work. One will find that by reading one 
page after another, an immense treasure of knowledge in art, science, 
literature, philosophy and religion will be revealed, and ultimately, by 
reading this one book, Kåñëa, love of Godhead will fructify. 
My grateful acknowledgement is due to Çrémän George Harrison, now 
chanting Hare Kåñëa, for his liberal contribution of $19,000 to meet the 
entire cost of printing this volume. May Kåñëa bestow upon this nice boy 
further advancement in Kåñëa consciousness. 
And at last my ever-willing blessings are bestowed upon Çrémän 
Çyämasundara däsa Adhikäré, Çrémän Brahmänanda däsa Brahmacäré, 
Çrémän Hayagréva däsa Adhikäré, Çrémän Satsvarüpa däsa Adhikäré, 
Çrématé Devahüti-devé däsé, Çrématé Jaduräëé-devé däsé, Çrémän 
Muralédhara däsa Brahmacäré, Çrémän Bhäradväja däsa Adhikäré and 
Çrémän Pradyumna däsa Adhikäré, etc., for their hard labor in different 
ways to make this publication a great success. 
Hare Kåñëa. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
10
Advent Day of 
Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté 
February 26th, 1970 
ISKCON Headquarters 
3764 Watseka Avenue 
Los Angeles, California 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
11
Introduction 
kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! he 
kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! he 
kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! rakña mäm 
kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! kåñëa! pähi mäm 
räma! räghava! räma! räghava! räma! räghava! rakña mäm 
kåñëa! keçava! kåñëa! keçava! kåñëa! keçava! pähi mäm 
Caitanya-caritämåta (Madhya 7.96) 
While attempting to write this book, Kåñëa, let me first offer my 
respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, Oà Viñëupäda 108 Çré 
Çrémad Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Gosvämé Mahäräja Prabhupäda. Then 
let me offer my respectful obeisances to the ocean of mercy, Lord Çré 
Kåñëa Caitanya Mahäprabhu. He is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Kåñëa Himself, appearing in the role of a devotee just to 
distribute the highest principles of devotional service. Lord Caitanya 
began His preaching from the country known as Gauòadeça (West 
Bengal). And as I belong to the Madhva-Gauòéya-sampradäya, I must 
therefore offer my respectful obeisances to the disciplic succession of 
that name. This Madhva-Gauòéya-sampradäya is also known as the 
Brahma-sampradäya because the disciplic succession originally began 
from Brahmä. Brahmä instructed the sage Närada, Närada instructed 
Vyäsadeva, and Vyäsadeva instructed Madhva Muni, or Madhväcärya. 
Çré Mädhavendra Puré, the originator of the Madhva-Gauòéya-
sampradäya, was a sannyäsé (renunciant) who belonged to the 
Madhväcärya disciplic succession. He had many renowned disciples, 
such as Nityänanda Prabhu, Advaita Prabhu and Éçvara Puré. Éçvara Puré 
happened to be the spiritual master of Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu. So 
let us offer our respectful obeisances to Éçvara Puré, Nityänanda Prabhu, 
Çré Advaita Äcärya Prabhu, Çréväsa Paëòita and Çré Gadädhara Paëòita. 
Next, let us offer our respectful obeisances to Svarüpa Dämodara, who 
acted as the private secretary to Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu; and let us 
offer our respectful obeisances to Çré Väsudeva Datta and the constant 
attendant of Lord Caitanya, Çré Govinda, and the constant friend of 
Lord Caitanya, Mukunda, and also to Muräri Gupta. And let us offer our 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
12
respectful obeisances to the six Gosvämés of Våndävana—Çré Rüpa 
Gosvämé, Çré Sanätana Gosvämé, Çré Raghunätha Bhaööa Gosvämé, Çré 
Gopäla Bhaööa Gosvämé, Çré Jéva Gosvämé and Çré Raghunätha däsa 
Gosvämé. 
Kåñëa Himself has explained in the Bhagavad-gétä that He is the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead and that whenever there are 
discrepancies in the regulative principles of man’s religious life and a 
prominence of irreligious activities, He appears on this earthly planet. In 
other words, when Lord Çré Kåñëa appeared, there was a necessity of 
minimizing the load of sinful activities accumulated on this planet, or in 
this universe. For affairs of the material creation, Lord Mahä-Viñëu, the 
plenary portion of Kåñëa, is in charge. 
When the Lord descends, the incarnation emanates from Viñëu. Mahä-
Viñëu is the original cause of material creation, and from Him 
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu expands, and then Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. 
Generally, all the incarnations appearing within this material universe 
are plenary expansions from Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. Therefore, the 
business of minimizing the overload of sinful activities on this earth does 
not belong to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa Himself. But 
when Kåñëa appears, all the Viñëu expansions also join with Him. 
Kåñëa’s different expansions—namely Näräyaëa, the quadruple 
expansion of Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha, as well 
as partial plenary expansions like Matsya, the incarnation of a fish, and 
the yuga-avatäras (incarnations for the millennium) and the 
manvantara-avatäras (incarnations who appear during the reigns of the 
Manus)—all combine together and appear with the body of Kåñëa, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Kåñëa is the complete whole, and thus 
all plenary expansions and incarnations always live with Him. 
Therefore when Kåñëa appeared, Lord Viñëu was also with Him. Kåñëa 
actually appears in order to demonstrate His Våndävana pastimes and in 
this way attract the fortunate conditioned souls and invite them back 
home, back to Godhead. The killing of the demons in Våndävana was 
carried out only by the Viñëu portion of Kåñëa. 
The Lord’s abode is described in the Bhagavad-gétä, Eighth Chapter, 
twentieth verse, where it is stated that there is another, eternal nature, 
the spiritual sky, which is transcendental to this manifested and 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
13
nonmanifested matter. The manifested world can be seen in the form of 
many stars and planetary systems, such as the sun and moon, but beyond 
this there is a nonmanifested portion, which is not approachable by 
anyone in this body. And beyond that nonmanifested matter is the 
spiritual kingdom. That kingdom is described in the Bhagavad-gétä as 
supreme and eternal, never to be annihilated. This material nature is 
subjected to repeated creation and annihilation. But that part, the 
spiritual nature, remains as it is, eternally. 
The supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, is also 
described in the Brahma-saàhitä as the abode of cintämaëi. That abode 
of Lord Kåñëa, known as Goloka Våndävana, is full of palaces made of 
touchstone. There the trees are called desire trees, and the cows are 
called surabhi. The Lord is served there by hundreds and thousands of 
goddesses of fortune. His name is Govinda, the Primeval Lord, and He is 
the cause of all causes. There the Lord plays His flute, His eyes are like 
lotus petals, and the color of His body is like that of a beautiful cloud. 
On His head is a peacock feather. He is so attractive that He excels 
thousands of Cupids. Lord Kåñëa gives only a little hint in the Gétä of 
His personal abode, which is the supermost planet in the spiritual 
kingdom. But in Çrémad-Bhägavatam Kåñëa actually appears with all His 
paraphernalia and demonstrates His activities in Våndävana, then at 
Mathurä, and then at Dvärakä. The subject matter of this book will 
gradually reveal all these activities. 
The family in which Kåñëa appeared is called the Yadu dynasty. This 
Yadu dynasty belongs to the family descending from Soma, the god in 
the moon planet. There are two different kñatriya families of the royal 
order, one descending from the king of the moon planet and the other 
descending from the king of the sun planet. Whenever the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead appears, He generally appears in a kñatriya 
family because He has to establish religious principles or the life of 
righteousness. The kñatriya family is the protector of the human race, 
according to the Vedic system. When the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead appeared as Lord Rämacandra, He appeared in the family 
descending from the sun-god, known as Raghu-vaàça; and when He 
appeared as Lord Kåñëa, He did so in the family of Yadu-vaàça. There is 
a long list of the kings of the Yadu-vaàça in the Ninth Canto, Twenty-
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
14
fourth Chapter, of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. All of them were great, powerful 
kings. Kåñëa’s father’s name was Vasudeva, son of Çürasena, descending 
from the Yadu dynasty. Actually, the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
does not belong to any dynasty of this material world, but the family in 
which the Supreme Personality of Godhead appears becomes famous, by 
His grace. For example, sandalwood is produced in the states of Malaya. 
Sandalwood has its own qualifications apart from Malaya, but because 
accidentally this wood is mainly produced in the states of Malaya, it is 
known as Malayan sandalwood. Similarly, Kåñëa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, belongs to everyone, but just as the sun rises 
from the east, although there are other directions from which it could 
rise, so by His own choice the Lord appears in a particular family, and 
that family becomes famous. 
As explained above, when Kåñëa appears, all His plenary expansions also 
appear with Him. Kåñëa appeared along with Balaräma (Baladeva), who 
is known as His elder brother. Balaräma is the origin of Saìkarñaëa, of 
the quadruple expansion. Balaräma is also the plenary expansion of 
Kåñëa. In this book, the attempt will be made to show how Kåñëa 
appeared in the family of the Yadu dynasty and how He displayed His 
transcendental characteristics. This is very vividly described in Çrémad-
Bhägavatam—specifically, the Tenth Canto—and thus the basis of this 
book will be the Tenth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. 
The pastimes of the Lord are generally heard and relished by liberated 
souls. Those who are conditioned souls are interested in reading stories 
of the material activities of some common man. Although similar 
narrations describing the transcendental activities of the Lord are found 
in Çrémad-Bhägavatam and other Puräëas, the conditioned souls still 
prefer to study ordinary narrations. They are not so interested in 
studying the narrations of the pastimes of the Lord, Kåñëa. And yet the 
descriptions or the pastimes of Lord Kåñëa are so attractive that they are 
relishable for all classes of men. There are three classes of men in this 
world. One class consists of liberated souls, another consists of those 
who are trying to be liberated, and the third consists of materialistic 
men. Whether one is liberated or is trying to be liberated, or is even 
grossly materialistic, the pastimes of Lord Kåñëa are worth studying. 
Liberated souls have no interest in materialistic activities. The 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
15
impersonalist theory that after liberation one becomes inactive and 
needs to hear nothing does not prove that a liberated person is actually 
inactive. A living soul cannot be inactive. He is either active in the 
conditioned state or in the liberated state. A diseased person, for 
example, is also active, but his activities are all painful. The same person, 
when freed from the diseased condition, is still active, but in the healthy 
condition the activities are full of pleasure. Similarly, the impersonalists 
only seek to get free from the diseased, conditioned activities, but they 
have no information of activities in the healthy condition. Those who 
are actually liberated and in full knowledge take to hearing the activities 
of Kåñëa; such engagement is pure spiritual activity. 
It is essential for persons who are actually liberated to hear about the 
pastimes of Kåñëa. That is the supreme relishable subject matter for one 
in the liberated state. Also, if persons who are trying to be liberated hear 
such narrations as the Bhagavad-gétä and Çrémad-Bhägavatam, then their 
path of liberation becomes very clear. The Bhagavad-gétä is the 
preliminary study of Çrémad-Bhägavatam. By studying the Gétä, one 
becomes fully conscious of the position of Lord Kåñëa; and when he is 
situated at the lotus feet of Kåñëa, he understands the narrations of 
Kåñëa as described in Çrémad-Bhägavatam. Lord Caitanya has therefore 
advised His followers that their business is to propagate kåñëa-kathä. 
Kåñëa-kathä means narrations about Lord Kåñëa. There are two kåñëa-
kathäs: narrations spoken by Kåñëa and narrations spoken about Kåñëa. 
The Bhagavad-gétä is the narration or the philosophy on the science of 
God, spoken by Kåñëa Himself. Çrémad-Bhägavatam is the narration 
about the activities and transcendental pastimes of Kåñëa. Both are 
kåñëa-kathä. It is the order of Lord Caitanya that kåñëa-kathä should be 
spread all over the world, because if the conditioned souls, suffering 
under the pangs of material existence, take to kåñëa-kathä, then their 
path of liberation will be open and clear. The purpose of presenting this 
book is primarily to induce people to understand Kåñëa or kåñëa-kathä, 
because thereby they can become freed from material bondage. 
This kåñëa-kathä will also be very much appealing to the most 
materialistic persons because Kåñëa’s pastimes with the gopés (cowherd 
girls) are exactly like the loving affairs between young girls and boys 
within this material world. Actually, the sex feeling found in human 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
16
society is not unnatural because this same sex feeling is there in the 
original Personality of Godhead. The pleasure potency is called Çrématé 
Rädhäräëé. The attraction of loving affairs on the basis of sex feeling is 
the original feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and we, the 
conditioned souls, being part and parcel of the Supreme, have such 
feelings also, but they are experienced within a perverted, minute 
condition. Therefore, when those who are after sex life in this material 
world hear about Kåñëa’s pastimes with the gopés, they will relish 
transcendental pleasure, although it appears to be materialistic. The 
advantage will be that they will gradually be elevated to the spiritual 
platform. In the Bhägavatam it is stated that if one hears the pastimes of 
Lord Kåñëa with the gopés, from authorities with submission, then he will 
be promoted to the platform of transcendental loving service to the 
Lord, and the material disease of lust within his heart will be completely 
vanquished. In other words, such hearing will counteract material sex 
life. 
This book, Kåñëa, which is filled with kåñëa-kathä, will thus appeal 
equally to the liberated souls and to persons who are trying to be 
liberated, as well as to the gross, conditioned materialist. According to 
the statement of Mahäräja Parékñit, who heard about Kåñëa from 
Çukadeva Gosvämé, kåñëa-kathä is equally applicable to every human 
being, whatever condition of life he is in. Surely everyone will 
appreciate it to the highest magnitude. But Mahäräja Parékñit also 
warned that persons who are simply engaged in killing animals and in 
killing themselves may not be very much attracted to kåñëa-kathä. In 
other words, ordinary persons who are following the regulative moral 
principles of scriptures, no matter in what condition they are found, will 
certainly be attracted, but not persons who are killing themselves. The 
exact word used in Çrémad-Bhägavatam is paçu-ghna, which means 
killing animals or killing oneself. Persons who are not self-realized and 
who are not interested in spiritual realization are killing themselves; 
they are committing suicide. Because this human form of life is 
especially meant for self-realization, by neglecting this important part of 
his activities one simply wastes his time like the animals. So he is paçu-
ghna. The other meaning of the word refers to those who are actually 
killing animals. This means persons who are animal-eaters (even dog-
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
17
eaters), for they are all engaged in killing animals in so many ways, such 
as hunting and opening slaughterhouses. Such persons cannot be 
interested in kåñëa-kathä. 
King Parékñit was especially interested in hearing kåñëa-kathä because he 
knew that his forefathers, particularly his grandfather, Arjuna, were 
victorious in the great Battle of Kurukñetra only because of Kåñëa. We 
may also take this material world as a Battlefield of Kurukñetra. 
Everyone is struggling hard for existence on this battlefield, and at every 
step there is danger. According to Mahäräja Parékñit, the Battlefield of 
Kurukñetra was just like a vast ocean full of dangerous animals. His 
grandfather Arjuna had to fight with such great heroes as Bhéñma, 
Droëa, Karëa and many others who were not ordinary fighters. Such 
warriors have been compared to the timiìgila fish in the ocean. The 
timiìgila fish can very easily swallow up big whales. The great fighters on 
the Battlefield of Kurukñetra could swallow many, many Arjunas very 
easily, but simply due to Kåñëa’s mercy, Arjuna was able to kill all of 
them. Just as one can cross with no exertion over the little bit of water 
contained in the hoofprint of a calf, so Arjuna, by the grace of Kåñëa, 
was able to very easily jump over the ocean of the Battle of Kurukñetra. 
Mahäräja Parékñit very much appreciated Kåñëa’s activities for many 
other reasons. Not only was his grandfather saved by Kåñëa, but he 
himself also was saved by Kåñëa. By the end of the Battle of Kurukñetra, 
all the members of the Kuru dynasty, both the sons and grandsons on 
the side of Dhåtaräñöra and those on the side of the Päëòavas, had died 
in the fighting. Except the five Päëòava brothers, everyone died on the 
Battlefield of Kurukñetra. Mahäräja Parékñit was at that time within the 
womb of his mother. His father, Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna, also 
died on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, and so Mahäräja Parékñit was a 
posthumous child. When he was in the womb of his mother, a 
brahmästra weapon was released by Açvatthämä to kill the child. When 
Parékñit Mahäräja’s mother, Uttarä, approached Kåñëa, Kåñëa, seeing the 
danger of abortion, entered her womb as the Supersoul and saved 
Mahäräja Parékñit. Mahäräja Parékñit’s other name is Viñëuräta because 
he was saved by Lord Viñëu Himself while still within the womb. 
Thus everyone, in any condition of life, should be interested in hearing 
about Kåñëa and His activities because He is the Supreme Absolute 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
18
Truth, the Personality of Godhead. He is all-pervading: inside He is 
living within everyone’s heart, and outside He is living as His universal 
form. And yet, as described in the Bhagavad-gétä, He appears as He is in 
the human society just to invite everyone to His transcendental abode, 
back home, back to Godhead. Everyone should be interested in knowing 
about Kåñëa, and this book is presented with this purpose: that people 
may know about Kåñëa and be perfectly benefited in this human form of 
life. 
In the Ninth Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, Çré Baladeva is described as 
the son of Rohiëé, a wife of Vasudeva. Vasudeva, the father of Kåñëa, 
had sixteen wives, and one of them was Rohiëé, the mother of Baladeva. 
But Baladeva is also described as the son of Devaké, so how could He be 
the son of both Devaké and Rohiëé? This was one of the questions put by 
Mahäräja Parékñit to Çukadeva Gosvämé, and it will be answered in due 
course. Mahäräja Parékñit also asked Çukadeva Gosvämé why Çré Kåñëa, 
just after His appearance as the son of Vasudeva, was immediately 
carried to the house of Nanda Mahäräja in Våndävana, Gokula. He also 
wanted to know what the activities of Lord Kåñëa were while He was in 
Våndävana and while He was in Mathurä. Besides that, he was especially 
inquisitive to know why Kåñëa killed His maternal uncle, Kaàsa. Kaàsa, 
being the brother of His mother, was a very intimate superior to Kåñëa, 
so how was it that He killed Kaàsa? Also, Mahäräja Parékñit asked how 
many years Lord Kåñëa remained in human society, how many years He 
reigned over the kingdom of Dvärakä, and how many wives He accepted 
there. A kñatriya king is generally accustomed to accept more than one 
wife; therefore Mahäräja Parékñit also inquired about His number of 
wives. The subject matter of this book is Çukadeva Gosvämé’s answering 
of these and other questions asked by Mahäräja Parékñit. 
The position of Mahäräja Parékñit and Çukadeva Gosvämé is unique. 
Mahäräja Parékñit is the right person to hear about the transcendental 
pastimes of Kåñëa, and Çukadeva Gosvämé is the right person to describe 
them. If such a fortunate combination is made possible, then kåñëa-kathä 
immediately becomes revealed, and people may benefit to the highest 
possible degree from such a conversation. 
This narration was presented by Çukadeva Gosvämé when Mahäräja 
Parékñit was prepared to give up his body, fasting on the bank of the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
19
Ganges. In order to assure Çukadeva Gosvämé that by hearing kåñëa-
kathä he would not feel tired, Mahäräja Parékñit expressed himself very 
frankly: “Hunger and thirst may give trouble to ordinary persons or to 
me, but the topics of Kåñëa are so nice that one can continue to hear 
them without feeling tired because such hearing situates one in the 
transcendental position.” It is understood that one must be very 
fortunate to hear kåñëa-kathä seriously, like Mahäräja Parékñit. He was 
especially intent on the subject matter because he was expecting death 
at any moment. Every one of us should be conscious of death at every 
moment. This life is not at all assured; at any time one can die. It does 
not matter whether one is a young man or an old man. So before death 
takes place, we must be fully Kåñëa conscious. 
At the point of his death, King Parékñit was hearing Çrémad-Bhägavatam 
from Çukadeva Gosvämé. When King Parékñit expressed his untiring 
desire to hear about Kåñëa, Çukadeva Gosvämé was very much pleased. 
Çukadeva was the greatest of all Bhägavata reciters, and thus he began to 
speak about Kåñëa’s pastimes, which destroy all inauspiciousness in this 
Age of Kali. Çukadeva Gosvämé thanked the King for his eagerness to 
hear about Kåñëa, and he encouraged him by saying, “My dear King, 
your intelligence is very keen because you are so eager to hear about the 
pastimes of Kåñëa.” He informed Mahäräja Parékñit that hearing and 
chanting the pastimes of Kåñëa are so auspicious that the processes 
purify the three varieties of men involved: he who recites the 
transcendental topics of Kåñëa, he who hears such topics, and he who 
inquires about Him. These pastimes are just like the Ganges water, 
which flows from the toe of Lord Viñëu: they purify the three worlds, 
the upper, middle and lower planetary systems. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
20
 
CHAPTER ONE 
The Advent of Lord Kåñëa 
 
Once the world was overburdened by the unnecessary defense force of 
different kings, who were actually demons but were posing themselves as 
the royal order. At that time, the whole world became perturbed, and 
the predominating deity of this earth, known as Bhümi, went to see Lord 
Brahmä to tell of her calamities due to the demoniac kings. Bhümi 
assumed the shape of a cow and presented herself before Lord Brahmä 
with tears in her eyes. She was bereaved and was weeping just to invoke 
the lord’s compassion. She related the calamitous position of the earth, 
and after hearing this, Lord Brahmä became much aggrieved, and he at 
once started for the ocean of milk, where Lord Viñëu resides. Lord 
Brahmä was accompanied by all the demigods headed by Lord Çiva, and 
Bhümi also followed. Arriving on the shore of the milk ocean, Lord 
Brahmä began to pacify Lord Viñëu, who formerly saved the earthly 
planet by assuming the transcendental form of a boar. 
In the Vedic mantras, there is a particular type of prayer called Puruña-
sükta. Generally, the demigods offer their obeisances unto Viñëu, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by chanting the Puruña-sükta. It is 
understood herein that the predominating deity of every planet can see 
the supreme lord of this universe, Brahmä, whenever there is some 
disturbance on his planet. And Brahmä can approach the Supreme Lord 
Viñëu, not by seeing Him directly but by standing on the shore of the 
ocean of milk. There is a planet within this universe called Çvetadvépa, 
and on that planet there is an ocean of milk. It is understood from 
various Vedic scriptures that just as there is the ocean of salt water on 
this planet, there are various kinds of oceans on other planets. 
Somewhere there is an ocean of milk, somewhere there is an ocean of 
oil, and somewhere an ocean of liquor and many other types of oceans. 
Puruña-sükta is the standard prayer which the demigods recite to 
appease the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu. 
Because He is lying on the ocean of milk, He is called Kñérodakaçäyé 
Viñëu. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, through whom all the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
21
incarnations within this universe appear. 
After all the demigods offered the Puruña-sükta prayer to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, they apparently heard no response. Then Lord 
Brahmä personally sat in meditation, and there was a message-
transmission from Lord Viñëu to Brahmä. Brahmä then broadcast the 
message to the demigods. That is the system of receiving Vedic 
knowledge. The Vedic knowledge is received first by Brahmä from the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, through the medium of the heart. As 
stated in the beginning of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, tene brahma hådä ya ädi-
kavaye: the transcendental knowledge of the Vedas was transmitted to 
Lord Brahmä through the heart. Here also, in the same way, only 
Brahmä could understand the message transmitted by Lord Viñëu, and 
he broadcast it to the demigods for their immediate action. The message 
was this: The Supreme Personality of Godhead would appear on the 
earth very soon, along with His supreme powerful potencies, and as long 
as He remained on the earth planet to execute His mission of 
annihilating the demons and establishing the devotees, the demigods 
should also remain there to assist Him. They should all immediately take 
birth in the family of the Yadu dynasty, wherein the Lord would also 
appear in due course of time. The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
Himself, Kåñëa, would personally appear as the son of Vasudeva. Before 
His appearance, all the demigods, along with their wives, should appear 
in different pious families in the world just to assist the Lord in 
executing His mission. The exact word used here is tat-priyärtham, 
which means the demigods should appear on the earth in order to please 
the Lord. In other words, any living entity who lives only to satisfy the 
Lord is a demigod. The demigods were further informed that the plenary 
portion of Lord Kåñëa, Ananta, who is maintaining the universal planets 
by extending His millions of hoods, would also appear on earth before 
Lord Kåñëa’s appearance. They were also informed that the external 
potency of Viñëu (Mäyä), with whom all the conditioned souls are 
enamored, would also appear by the order of the Supreme Lord, just to 
execute His purpose. 
After instructing and pacifying all the demigods, as well as Bhümi, with 
sweet words, Lord Brahmä, the father of all prajäpatis, or progenitors of 
universal population, departed for his abode, the highest material planet, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
22
called Brahmaloka. 
The leader of the Yadu dynasty, King Çürasena, was ruling over the 
country known as Mäthura, wherein lies the city of Mathurä, as well as 
the district known as Çürasena, which was named after him. On account 
of the rule of King Çürasena, Mathurä became the capital city of all the 
kings of the Yadus. Mathurä was also made the capital of the kings of the 
Yadu dynasty because the Yadus were a very pious family and knew that 
Mathurä is the place where Lord Çré Kåñëa lives eternally, just as He also 
lives in Dvärakä. 
Once upon a time, Vasudeva, the son of Çürasena, just after marrying 
Devaké, was going home on his chariot with his newly wedded wife. The 
father of Devaké, known as Devaka, had contributed a sufficient dowry 
because he was very affectionate toward his daughter. He had 
contributed hundreds of chariots completely decorated with gold 
equipment. At that time, Kaàsa, the son of Ugrasena, in order to please 
his sister, Devaké, had voluntarily taken the reins of the horses of 
Vasudeva’s chariot and was driving. According to the custom of the 
Vedic civilization, when a girl is married, the brother takes the sister and 
brother-in-law to their home. Because the newly married girl may feel 
too much separation from her father’s family, the brother goes with her 
until she reaches her father-in-law’s house. The full dowry contributed 
by Devaka was as follows: 400 elephants fully decorated with golden 
garlands, 15,000 decorated horses, and 1,800 chariots. He also arranged 
for 200 beautiful girls to follow his daughter. The kñatriya system of 
marriage, still current in India, dictates that when a kñatriya is married, a 
few dozen of the bride’s young girlfriends (in addition to the bride) go to 
the house of the king. The followers of the queen are called 
maidservants, but actually they act as friends of the queen. This practice 
is prevalent from time immemorial, traceable at least to the time before 
the advent of Lord Kåñëa 5,000 years ago. So Vasudeva brought home 
another 200 beautiful girls along with his wife Devaké. 
While the bride and bridegroom were passing along on the chariot, there 
were different kinds of musical instruments playing to indicate the 
auspicious moment. There were conchshells, bugles, drums and 
kettledrums; combined together, they were vibrating a nice concert. The 
procession was passing very pleasingly, and Kaàsa was driving the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
23
chariot, when suddenly there was a miraculous sound vibrated from the 
sky which especially announced to Kaàsa: “Kaàsa, you are such a fool! 
You are driving the chariot of your sister and your brother-in-law, but 
you do not know that the eighth child of this sister will kill you.” 
Kaàsa was the son of Ugrasena, of the Bhoja dynasty. It is said that 
Kaàsa was the most demoniac of all the Bhoja dynasty kings. 
Immediately after hearing the prophecy from the sky, he caught hold of 
Devaké’s hair and was just about to kill her with his sword. Vasudeva was 
astonished at Kaàsa’s behavior, and in order to pacify the cruel, 
shameless brother-in-law, he began to speak as follows, with great reason 
and evidence. He said, “My dear brother-in-law Kaàsa, you are the most 
famous king of the Bhoja dynasty, and people know that you are the 
greatest warrior and a valiant king. How is it that you are so infuriated 
that you are prepared to kill a woman who is your own sister at this 
auspicious time of her marriage? Why should you be so much afraid of 
death? Death is already born along with your birth. From the very day 
you took your birth, you began to die. Suppose you are twenty-five years 
old; that means you have already died twenty-five years. Every moment, 
every second, you are dying. Why then should you be so much afraid of 
death? Final death is inevitable. You may die either today or in a 
hundred years; you cannot avoid death. Why should you be so much 
afraid? Actually, death means annihilation of the present body. As soon 
as the present body stops functioning and mixes with the five elements 
of material nature, the living entity within the body accepts another 
body, according to his present action and reaction. It is just like when a 
man walks on the street: he puts forward his foot, and when he is 
confident that his foot is situated on sound ground, he lifts the other 
foot. In this way, one after another, the bodies change and the soul 
transmigrates. See how the plantworms change from one twig to another 
so carefully! Similarly, the living entity changes his body as soon as the 
higher authorities decide on his next body. As long as a living entity is 
conditioned within this material world, he must take material bodies one 
after another. His next particular body is offered by the laws of nature, 
according to the actions and reactions of this life. 
“This body is exactly like one of the bodies which we always see in 
dreams. During our dream of sleep, we create so many bodies according 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
24
to mental creation. We have seen gold, and we have also seen a 
mountain, so in a dream we can see a golden mountain by combining the 
two ideas. Sometimes in dreams we see that we have a body which is 
flying in the sky, and at that time we completely forget our present body. 
Similarly, these bodies are changing. When you have one body, you 
forget the past body. During a dream, we may make contact with so 
many new kinds of bodies, but when we are awake we forget them all. 
And actually these material bodies are the creations of our mental 
activities. But at the present moment we do not recollect our past bodies. 
“The nature of the mind is flickering. Sometimes it accepts something, 
and immediately it rejects the same thing. Accepting and rejecting is the 
process of the mind in contact with the five objects of sense 
gratification: form, taste, smell, sound and touch. In its speculative way, 
the mind comes in touch with the objects of sense gratification, and 
when the living entity desires a particular type of body, he gets it. 
Therefore, the body is an offering by the laws of material nature. The 
living entity accepts a body and comes out again into the material world 
to enjoy or suffer according to the construction of the body. Unless we 
have a particular type of body, we cannot enjoy or suffer according to 
our mental proclivities inherited from the previous life. The particular 
type of body is actually offered to us according to our mental condition 
at the time of death. 
“The luminous planets like the sun, moon or stars reflect themselves in 
different types of reservoirs, like water, oil or ghee. The reflection moves 
according to the movement of the reservoir. The reflection of the moon 
is on the water, and the moving water makes the moon also appear to be 
moving, but actually the moon is not moving. Similarly, by mental 
concoction the living entity attains different kinds of bodies, although 
actually he has no connection with such bodies. But on account of 
illusion, being enchanted by the influence of mäyä, the living entity 
thinks that he belongs to a particular type of body. That is the way of 
conditioned life. Suppose a living entity is now in a human form of body. 
He thinks that he belongs to the human community, or a particular 
country or particular place. He identifies himself in that way and 
unnecessarily prepares for another body, which is not required by him. 
Such desires and mental concoctions are the cause of different types of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
25
body. The covering influence of material nature is so strong that the 
living entity is satisfied in whatever body he gets, and he identifies with 
that body with great pleasure. Therefore, I beg to request you not to be 
overwhelmed by the dictation of your mind and body.” 
Vasudeva thus requested Kaàsa not to be envious of his newly married 
sister. One should not be envious of anyone, because envy is the cause of 
fear both in this world and in the next, when one is before Yamaräja 
(the lord of punishment after death). Vasudeva appealed to Kaàsa on 
behalf of Devaké, stating that she was his younger sister. He also 
appealed at an auspicious moment, at the time of marriage. A younger 
sister or brother is supposed to be protected as one’s child. “The position 
is overall so delicate,” Vasudeva reasoned, “that if you kill her, it will go 
against your high reputation.” 
In this way Vasudeva tried to pacify Kaàsa by good instruction as well as 
by philosophical discrimination, but Kaàsa was not to be pacified 
because his association was demoniac. Because of his demoniac 
associations, he was a demon, although born in a very high royal family. 
A demon never cares for any good instruction. He is just like a 
determined thief: one can give him moral instruction, but it will not be 
effective. Similarly, those who are demoniac or atheistic by nature can 
hardly assimilate any good instruction, however authorized it may be. 
That is the difference between demigod and demon. Those who can 
accept good instruction and try to live their lives in that way are called 
demigods, and those who are unable to take such good instruction are 
called demons. 
Failing in his attempt to pacify Kaàsa, Vasudeva wondered how he 
would protect his wife, Devaké. When there is imminent danger, an 
intelligent person should try to avoid the dangerous position as far as 
possible. But if, in spite of endeavoring by all intelligence, one fails to 
avoid the dangerous position, there is no fault on his part. One should 
try his best to execute his duties, but if the attempt fails, he is not at 
fault. 
Vasudeva thought of his wife as follows: “For the present let me save the 
life of Devaké; then later on, if there are children, I shall see how to save 
them.” He further thought, “If in the future I get a child who can kill 
Kaàsa—just as Kaàsa is thinking—then both Devaké and the child will 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
26
be saved because the law of Providence is inconceivable. But now, some 
way or other, let me save the life of Devaké.” 
There is no certainty how a living entity contacts a certain type of body, 
just as there is no certainty how a blazing fire comes in contact with a 
certain type of wood in the forest. When there is a forest fire, it is 
experienced that the blazing fire sometimes leaps over one tree and 
catches another by the influence of the wind. Similarly, a living entity 
may be very careful in the matter of executing his duties, but it is still 
very difficult for him to know what type of body he is going to get in the 
next life. Mahäräja Bharata was very faithfully executing the duties of 
self-realization, but by chance he developed temporary affection for a 
deer, and in his next life he had to accept the body of a deer. 
Vasudeva, after deliberating on how to save his wife, began to speak to 
Kaàsa with great respect, although Kaàsa was the most sinful man. 
Sometimes it happens that a most virtuous person like Vasudeva has to 
flatter a person like Kaàsa, a most vicious person. That is the way of all 
diplomatic transactions. Although Vasudeva was deeply aggrieved, he 
smiled outwardly. He addressed the shameless Kaàsa in that way 
because he was so atrocious. Vasudeva said to Kaàsa, “My dear brother-
in-law, please consider that you have no danger from your sister. You are 
awaiting some danger because you have heard a prophetic voice in the 
sky. But the danger is to come from the sons of your sister, who are not 
present now. And who knows? There may or may not be sons in the 
future. Considering all this, you are safe for the present. Nor is there 
cause of fear from your sister. If there are any sons born of her, I promise 
that I shall present all of them to you for necessary action.” 
Kaàsa knew the value of Vasudeva’s word of honor, and he was 
convinced by his argument. For the time being, he desisted from the 
heinous killing of his sister. Thus Vasudeva was pleased and praised the 
decision of Kaàsa. In this way, he returned to his home. 
Each year thereafter, in due course of time, Devaké gave birth to a child. 
Thus she gave birth to eight male children, as well as one daughter. 
When the first son was born, Vasudeva kept his word of honor and 
immediately brought the child before Kaàsa. It is said that Vasudeva 
was very much elevated and famous for his word of honor, and he 
wanted to maintain this fame. Although it was very painful for 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
27
Vasudeva to hand over the newly born child, Kaàsa was very glad to 
receive him. But he became a little compassionate with the behavior of 
Vasudeva. This event is very exemplary. For a great soul like Vasudeva, 
there is nothing considered to be painful in the course of discharging 
one’s duty. A learned person like Vasudeva carries out his duties without 
hesitation. On the other hand, a demon like Kaàsa never hesitates in 
committing any abominable action. It is said, therefore, that a saintly 
person can tolerate all kinds of miserable conditions of life, a learned 
man can discharge his duties without awaiting favorable circumstances, 
a heinous person like Kaàsa can act in any sinful way, and a devotee 
can sacrifice everything to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Kaàsa became satisfied by the action of Vasudeva. He was surprised to 
see Vasudeva keeping his promise, and being compassionate upon him 
and pleased, he began to speak as follows: “My dear Vasudeva, you need 
not present this child to me. I am not in danger from this child. I have 
heard that the eighth child born of you and Devaké will kill me. Why 
should I accept this child unnecessarily? You can take him back.” 
When Vasudeva was returning home with his firstborn child, although 
he was pleased by the behavior of Kaàsa, he could not believe in him 
because he knew that Kaàsa was uncontrolled. An atheistic person 
cannot be firm in his word of honor. One who cannot control the senses 
cannot be steady in his determination. The great politician Cäëakya 
Paëòita said, “Never put your trust in a diplomat or in a woman.” Those 
who are addicted to unrestricted sense gratification can never be 
truthful, nor can they be trusted with any faith. 
At that time the great sage Närada came to Kaàsa. He was informed of 
Kaàsa’s becoming compassionate to Vasudeva and returning his 
firstborn child. Närada was very anxious to accelerate the descent of 
Lord Kåñëa as soon as possible. He therefore informed Kaàsa that in 
Våndävana personalities like Nanda Mahäräja and all the other cowherd 
men and their wives, and on the other side Vasudeva, his father 
Çürasena and all his relatives born in the family of Våñëi of the Yadu 
dynasty, along with all their friends and well-wishers, were actually 
demigods. Närada warned Kaàsa to be careful of them, since Kaàsa and 
his friends and advisors were all demons. Demons are always afraid of 
demigods. After being thus informed by Närada about the appearance of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
28
the demigods in different families, Kaàsa at once became very much 
alarmed. He understood that since the demigods had already appeared, 
Lord Viñëu must be coming soon. He at once arrested both his brother-
in-law Vasudeva and Devaké and put them behind prison bars. 
Within the prison, shackled in iron chains, Vasudeva and Devaké gave 
birth to a male child year after year, and Kaàsa, thinking each of the 
babies to be the incarnation of Viñëu, killed them one after another. He 
was particularly afraid of the eighth child, but after the visit of Närada, 
he came to the conclusion that any child might be Kåñëa. Therefore it 
was better to kill all the babies who took birth from Devaké and 
Vasudeva. 
This action of Kaàsa is not very difficult to understand. There are many 
instances in the history of the world of persons in the royal order who 
have killed father, brother or a whole family and friends for the 
satisfaction of their ambitions. There is nothing astonishing about this, 
for members of the demoniac, greedy royal order can kill anyone for 
their nefarious ambitions. 
Kaàsa was made aware of his previous birth by the grace of Närada. He 
learned that in his previous birth he was a demon of the name Kälanemi 
and that he was killed by Viñëu. Having taken his birth in the Bhoja 
family, he decided to become the deadly enemy of the Yadu dynasty; 
Kåñëa was going to take birth in that family, and Kaàsa was very much 
afraid that he would be killed by Kåñëa, just as he had been killed in his 
last birth. 
He first of all imprisoned his father, Ugrasena, because he was the chief 
king among the Yadu, Bhoja and Andhaka dynasties, and he also 
occupied the kingdom of Çürasena, Vasudeva’s father. He declared 
himself the king of all such places. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the First Chapter of Kåñëa, “The 
Advent of Lord Kåñëa.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
29
 
CHAPTER TWO 
Prayers by the Demigods for 
 Lord Kåñëa in the Womb 
 
King Kaàsa not only occupied the kingdoms of the Yadu, Bhoja and 
Andhaka dynasties and the kingdom of Çürasena, but he also made 
alliances with all the other demoniac kings, as follows: the demon 
Pralamba, demon Baka, demon Cäëüra, demon Tåëävarta, demon 
Aghäsura, demon Muñöika, demon Ariñöa, demon Dvivida, demon 
Pütanä, demon Keçé and demon Dhenuka. At that time, Jaräsandha was 
the king of Magadha province (known at present as Bihar state). Thus 
by his diplomatic policy, Kaàsa consolidated the most powerful kingdom 
of his time, under the protection of Jaräsandha. He made further 
alliances with such kings as Bäëäsura and Bhaumäsura, until he was the 
strongest. Then he began to behave most inimically towards the Yadu 
dynasty, into which Kåñëa was to take His birth. 
Being harassed by Kaàsa, the kings of the Yadu, Bhoja and Andhaka 
dynasties began to take shelter in different states such as the state of the 
Kurus, the state of the Païcälas, and the states known as Kekaya, Çälva, 
Vidarbha, Niñadha, Videha and Koçala. Kaàsa broke the solidarity of 
the Yadu kingdom, as well as the Bhoja and Andhaka. He made his 
position the most solid within the vast tract of land known at that time 
as Bhärata-varña. 
When Kaàsa killed the six babies of Devaké and Vasudeva one after 
another, many friends and relatives of Kaàsa approached him and 
requested him to discontinue these heinous activities. But all of them 
became worshipers of Kaàsa. 
When Devaké became pregnant for the seventh time, a plenary 
expansion of Kåñëa known as Ananta appeared within her womb. 
Devaké was overwhelmed with both jubilation and lamentation. She was 
joyful, for she could understand that Lord Viñëu had taken shelter 
within her womb, but at the same time she was sorry that as soon as her 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
30
child would come out, Kaàsa would kill Him. At that time the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, being compassionate upon the Yadus, 
who were fearful due to the atrocities committed by Kaàsa, ordered the 
appearance of Yogamäyä, His internal potency. Kåñëa is the Lord of the 
universe, but He is especially the Lord of the Yadu dynasty. 
This Yogamäyä is the principal potency of the Personality of Godhead. 
In the Vedas it is stated that the Lord, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, has multipotencies. Paräsya çaktir vividhaiva çrüyate. All the 
different potencies are acting externally and internally, and Yogamäyä is 
the chief of all potencies. He ordered the appearance of Yogamäyä in the 
land of Vrajabhümi, in Våndävana, which is always decorated and full 
with beautiful cows. In Våndävana, Rohiëé, one of the wives of 
Vasudeva, was residing at the house of King Nanda and Queen Yaçodä. 
Not only Rohiëé but many others in the Yadu dynasty were scattered all 
over the country due to their fear of the atrocities of Kaàsa. Some of 
them were even living in the caves of the mountains. 
The Lord thus informed Yogamäyä: “Under the imprisonment of Kaàsa 
are Devaké and Vasudeva, and at the present moment My plenary 
expansion, Çeña, is within the womb of Devaké. You can arrange the 
transfer of Çeña from the womb of Devaké to the womb of Rohiëé. After 
this arrangement, I am personally going to appear in the womb of 
Devaké with My full potencies. Then I shall appear as the son of Devaké 
and Vasudeva. And you shall appear as the daughter of Nanda and 
Yaçodä in Våndävana. 
“Since you will appear as My contemporary sister, and since you will 
quickly satisfy desires for sense gratification, people within the world 
will worship you with all kinds of valuable presentations: incense, 
candles, flowers and offerings of sacrifice. People who are after 
materialistic perfection will worship you under the different forms of 
your expansions, which will be named Durgä, Bhadrakälé, Vijayä, 
Vaiñëavé, Kumudä, Caëòikä, Kåñëä, Mädhavé, Kanyakä, Mäyä, Näräyaëé, 
Éçäné, Çäradä and Ambikä.” 
Kåñëa and Yogamäyä appeared as brother and sister—the Supreme 
Powerful and the supreme power. Although there is no clear distinction 
between the Powerful and the power, power is always subordinate to the 
Powerful. Those who are materialistic are worshipers of the power, but 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
31
those who are transcendentalists are worshipers of the Powerful. Kåñëa 
is the Supreme Powerful, and Durgä is the supreme power within the 
material world. Actually people in the Vedic culture worship both the 
Powerful and the power. There are many hundreds and thousands of 
temples of Viñëu and Devé, and sometimes they are worshiped 
simultaneously. The worshiper of the power, Durgä, or the external 
energy of Kåñëa, may achieve all kinds of material success very easily, 
but anyone who wants to be elevated transcendentally must engage in 
worshiping the Powerful in Kåñëa consciousness. 
The Lord also declared to Yogamäyä, “My plenary expansion, Ananta 
Çeña, is within the womb of Devaké. On account of being forcibly 
attracted to the womb of Rohiëé, He will be known as Saìkarñaëa and 
will be the source of all spiritual power, or bala, by which one can attain 
the highest bliss of life, which is called ramaëa. Therefore the plenary 
portion Ananta will be known after His appearance either as 
Saìkarñaëa or as Balaräma.” 
In the Upaniñads it is stated, näyam ätmä bala-hénena labhyaù. The 
purport is that one cannot attain the supreme platform of self-
realization without being sufficiently favored by Balaräma. Bala does not 
mean physical strength. No one can attain spiritual perfection by 
physical strength. One must have the spiritual strength which is infused 
by Balaräma, or Saìkarñaëa. Ananta, or Çeña, is the power which 
sustains all the planets in their different positions. Materially this 
sustaining power is known as the law of gravitation, but actually it is a 
display of the potency of Saìkarñaëa. Balaräma, or Saìkarñaëa, is 
spiritual power, or the original spiritual master. Therefore Lord 
Nityänanda Prabhu, who is also the incarnation of Balaräma, is the 
original spiritual master. And the spiritual master is the representative 
of Balaräma, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who supplies spiritual 
strength. In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is confirmed that the spiritual 
master is the manifestation of the mercy of Kåñëa. 
Thus ordered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Yogamäyä 
circumambulated the Lord and then appeared within this material world 
according to His order. When Yogamäyä, the supreme power of the 
supremely powerful Personality of Godhead, transferred Lord Çeña from 
the womb of Devaké to the womb of Rohiëé, both Devaké and Rohiëé 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
32
were under Yogamäyä’s spell, which is called yoga-nidrä. When this was 
done, people understood that Devaké’s seventh pregnancy had been a 
miscarriage. Thus although Balaräma appeared as the son of Devaké, He 
was transferred to the womb of Rohiëé to appear as her son. After this 
arrangement, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, who is always 
ready to protect His unalloyed devotees, entered within the mind of 
Vasudeva as the Lord of the whole creation, with full inconceivable 
potencies. It is understood in this connection that Lord Kåñëa first of all 
situated Himself in the unalloyed heart of Vasudeva and was then 
transferred to the heart of Devaké. He was not put into the womb of 
Devaké by seminal discharge. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, by 
His inconceivable potency, can appear in any way. It is not necessary for 
Him to appear in the ordinary way, by seminal injection within the 
womb of a woman. 
When Vasudeva was sustaining the form of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead within his heart, he appeared just like the glowing sun, whose 
shining rays are always unbearable and scorching to the common man. 
The form of the Lord situated in the pure unalloyed heart of Vasudeva is 
not different from the original form of Kåñëa. The appearance of the 
form of Kåñëa anywhere, and specifically within the heart, is called 
dhäma. Dhäma refers not only to Kåñëa’s form but also to His name, His 
qualities and His paraphernalia. Everything becomes manifest 
simultaneously. 
Thus the eternal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with full 
potencies was transferred from the mind of Vasudeva to the mind of 
Devaké, exactly as the setting sun’s rays are transferred to the full moon 
rising in the east. 
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thus entered the body of 
Devaké from the body of Vasudeva without being subject to any of the 
conditions of an ordinary living entity. Since Kåñëa was there, it is to be 
understood that all His plenary expansions, such as Näräyaëa, and 
incarnations like Lord Nåsiàha and Varäha, were with Him, and They 
also were not subject to the conditions of material existence. In this way, 
Devaké became the residence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who is one without a second and the cause of all creation. Devaké 
became the residence of the Absolute Truth, but because she was 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
33
confined within the house of Kaàsa, she looked just like a suppressed 
fire, or like misused education. When fire is kept in a jug, the 
illuminating rays of the fire cannot be very much appreciated. Similarly, 
misused knowledge, which does not benefit the people in general, is not 
very much appreciated. So Devaké was kept within the prison walls of 
Kaàsa’s palace, and no one could see her transcendental beauty, which 
resulted from her conceiving the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Kaàsa, however, saw the transcendental beauty of his sister Devaké, and 
he at once concluded that the Supreme Personality of Godhead had 
taken shelter in her womb. She had never before looked so wonderfully 
beautiful. He could distinctly understand that there was something 
wonderful within the womb of Devaké. In this way, Kaàsa became 
perturbed because he was sure that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
who would kill him in the future, had now come. Kaàsa began to think, 
“What is to be done with Devaké? Surely she has Viñëu or Kåñëa within 
her womb, so it is certain that Kåñëa has come to execute the mission of 
the demigods. And even if I immediately kill Devaké, His mission cannot 
be frustrated.” Kaàsa knew very well that no one can frustrate the 
purpose of Viñëu. Any intelligent man can understand that the laws of 
God cannot be violated. His purpose will be served in spite of all 
impediments offered by the demons. Kaàsa thought, “If I kill Devaké at 
the present moment, Viñëu will enforce His supreme will more 
vehemently. To kill Devaké just now would be a most abominable act. 
No one desires to kill his reputation, even in an awkward situation; if I 
kill Devaké now, my reputation will be spoiled. Devaké is a woman, and 
she is under my shelter; she is pregnant, and if I kill her, immediately my 
reputation, the results of my pious activities and my duration of life will 
all be finished.” 
He further deliberated, “A person who is too cruel is as good as dead, 
even in this lifetime. No one likes a cruel person during his lifetime, and 
after his death, people curse him. On account of his self-identification 
with the body, he must be degraded and pushed into the darkest region 
of hell.” Kaàsa thus meditated on all the pros and cons of killing Devaké 
at that time. 
Kaàsa finally decided not to kill Devaké right away but to wait for the 
inevitable future. But his mind became absorbed in animosity against 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
34
the Personality of Godhead. He patiently waited for the deliverance of 
the child, expecting to kill Him, as he had done previously with the 
other babies of Devaké. Thus being merged in the ocean of animosity 
against the Personality of Godhead, he began to think of Kåñëa or Viñëu 
while sitting, while sleeping, while walking, while eating, while 
working—in all the situations of his life. His mind became so much 
absorbed with the thought of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that 
indirectly he could see only Kåñëa or Viñëu around him. Unfortunately, 
although his mind was so absorbed in the thought of Viñëu, he is not 
recognized as a devotee because he was thinking of Kåñëa as an enemy. 
The state of mind of a great devotee is also to be always absorbed in 
Kåñëa, but a devotee thinks of Him favorably, not unfavorably. To think 
of Kåñëa favorably is Kåñëa consciousness, but to think of Kåñëa 
unfavorably is not Kåñëa consciousness. 
At this time Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva, accompanied by great sages 
like Närada and followed by many other demigods, invisibly appeared in 
the house of Kaàsa. They began to pray to the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead in select verses, which are very pleasing to the devotees and 
which award fulfillment of their desires. The first words they spoke 
acclaimed that the Lord is true to His vow. As stated in the Bhagavad-
gétä, Kåñëa descends to this material world just to protect the pious and 
destroy the impious. That is His vow. The demigods could understand 
that the Lord had taken His residence within the womb of Devaké to 
fulfill His vow, and they were very glad that the Lord was appearing in 
order to fulfill His mission. 
Then the demigods addressed the Lord as satyaà param, or the Supreme 
Absolute Truth. Everyone is searching after the truth. That is the 
philosophical way of life. The demigods give information that the 
Supreme Absolute Truth is Kåñëa. One who becomes fully Kåñëa 
conscious can attain the Absolute Truth. Kåñëa is the Absolute Truth 
because, unlike relative truth, He is Truth in all the three phases of 
eternal time. Time is divided into past, present and future. Kåñëa is 
Truth always—past, present and future. In the material world 
everything is being controlled by supreme time, in the course of past, 
present and future. But before the creation, Kåñëa was existing, and 
when there is creation, everything is resting in Kåñëa, and when this 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
35
creation is finished, Kåñëa will remain. Therefore, He is Absolute Truth 
in all circumstances. If there is any truth within this material world, it 
emanates from the Supreme Truth, Kåñëa. If there is any opulence 
within this material world, the cause of the opulence is Kåñëa. If there is 
any reputation within this material world, the cause of the reputation is 
Kåñëa. If there is any strength within this material world, the cause of 
such strength is Kåñëa. If there is any wisdom and education within this 
material world, the cause of such wisdom and education is Kåñëa. 
Therefore Kåñëa is the source of all relative truths. 
This material world is composed of five principal elements— earth, 
water, fire, air and ether—and all such elements are emanations from 
Kåñëa. The material scientists accept these primary five elements as the 
cause of the material manifestation, but the elements in their gross and 
subtle states are produced by Kåñëa. The living entities who are working 
within this material world are products of His marginal potency. In the 
Seventh Chapter of the Bhagavad-gétä, it is clearly stated that the whole 
manifestation is a combination of two kinds of energies of Kåñëa, the 
superior energy and the inferior energy. The living entities are the 
superior energy, and the dead material elements are His inferior energy. 
In its dormant stage, everything remains in Kåñëa. 
The demigods continued to offer their respectful prayers unto the 
supreme form of the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, by analytical study 
of the material manifestation. What is this material manifestation? It is 
just like a tree. A tree stands on the ground. Similarly, the tree of the 
material manifestation is standing on the ground of material nature. 
This material manifestation is compared to a tree because a tree is 
ultimately cut off in due course of time. A tree is called våkña. Våkña 
means that thing which will be ultimately cut off. Therefore, this tree of 
the material manifestation cannot be accepted as the Ultimate Truth, 
because it is influenced by time. But Kåñëa’s body is eternal: He existed 
before the material manifestation, He is existing while the material 
manifestation is continuing, and when it will be dissolved, He will 
continue to exist. Therefore only Kåñëa can be accepted as the Absolute 
Truth. 
The Kaöha Upaniñad also cites this example of the tree of material 
manifestation standing on the ground of material nature. This tree has 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
36
two kinds of fruits, distress and happiness. Those who are living on the 
tree of the body are just like two birds. One bird is the localized aspect of 
Kåñëa known as the Paramätmä, and the other bird is the living entity. 
The living entity is eating the fruits of this material manifestation. 
Sometimes he eats the fruit of happiness, and sometimes he eats the fruit 
of distress. But the other bird is not interested in eating the fruit of 
distress or happiness because he is self-satisfied. The Kaöha Upaniñad 
states that one bird on the tree of the body is eating the fruits, and the 
other bird is simply witnessing. The roots of this tree extend in three 
directions. This means that the root of the tree is the three modes of 
material nature: goodness, passion and ignorance. Just as the tree’s root 
expands, so, by association of the modes of material nature (goodness, 
passion and ignorance), one expands his duration of material existence. 
The tastes of the fruits are of four kinds: religiosity, economic 
development, sense gratification and, ultimately, liberation. According 
to the different associations in the three modes of material nature, the 
living entities are tasting different kinds of religiosity, different kinds of 
economic development, different kinds of sense gratification and 
different kinds of liberation. Practically all material work is performed 
in ignorance, but because there are three qualities, sometimes the quality 
of ignorance is covered with goodness or passion. The taste of these 
material fruits is accepted through five senses. The five sense organs 
through which knowledge is acquired are subjected to six kinds of whips: 
lamentation, illusion, infirmity, death, hunger and thirst. This material 
body, or the material manifestation, is covered by seven layers: skin, 
flesh, blood, marrow, bone, fat and semen. The branches of the tree are 
eight: earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and ego. There are 
nine gates in this body: the two eyes, two nostrils, two ears, one mouth, 
one genital, one rectum. And there are ten kinds of internal air passing 
within the body: präëa, apäna, udäna, vyäna, samäna, etc. The two birds 
seated in this tree, as explained above, are the living entity and the 
localized Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramätmä. 
The root cause of the material manifestation described here is the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
expands Himself to take charge of the three qualities of the material 
world. Viñëu takes charge of the mode of goodness, Brahmä takes charge 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
37
of the mode of passion, and Lord Çiva takes charge of the mode of 
ignorance. Brahmä, by the mode of passion, creates this manifestation, 
Lord Viñëu maintains this manifestation by the mode of goodness, and 
Lord Çiva annihilates it by the mode of ignorance. The whole creation 
ultimately rests in the Supreme Lord. He is the cause of creation, 
maintenance and dissolution. And when the whole manifestation is 
dissolved, in its subtle form as the Supreme Lord’s energy it rests within 
His body. 
“At the present,” the demigods prayed, “the Supreme Lord Kåñëa is 
appearing just for the maintenance of this manifestation. Actually the 
Supreme Cause is one, but, being deluded by the three modes of material 
nature, less intelligent persons see that the material world is manifested 
through different causes. Those who are intelligent can see that the 
cause is one, Kåñëa.” As it is stated in the Brahma-saàhitä, sarva-käraëa-
käraëam [Bs. 5.1]. Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the 
cause of all causes. Brahmä is the deputed agent for creation, Viñëu is 
the expansion of Kåñëa for maintenance, and Lord Çiva is the expansion 
of Kåñëa for dissolution. 
“Our dear Lord,” the demigods prayed, “it is very difficult to understand 
Your eternal form or personality. People in general are unable to 
understand Your actual form; therefore You are personally descending 
to exhibit Your original eternal form. Somehow people can understand 
the different incarnations of Your Lordship, but they are puzzled to 
understand the eternal form of Kåñëa with two hands, moving among 
human beings exactly like one of them. This eternal form of Your 
Lordship gives ever-increasing transcendental pleasure to the devotees, 
but for the nondevotees this form is very dangerous.” As stated in the 
Bhagavad-gétä, Kåñëa is very pleasing to the sädhus (pariträëäya 
sädhünäm) [Bg. 4.8]. But this form is very dangerous for the demons 
because Kåñëa also descends to kill the demons. He is, therefore, 
simultaneously pleasing to the devotees and dangerous to the demons. 
“Our dear lotus-eyed Lord, You are the source of pure goodness. There 
are many great sages who simply by samädhi, or transcendentally 
meditating upon Your lotus feet and thus being absorbed in Your 
thought, have easily transformed the great ocean of nescience created by 
the material nature into no more than the water in a calf’s hoofprint.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
38
The purpose of meditation is to focus the mind upon the Personality of 
Godhead, beginning from His lotus feet. Simply by meditation on the 
lotus feet of the Lord, great sages cross over this vast ocean of material 
existence without difficulty. 
“O self-illuminated one, the great saintly persons who have crossed over 
the ocean of nescience by the help of the transcendental boat of Your 
lotus feet have not taken away that boat. It is still lying on this side.” If 
one takes a boat to cross over a river, the boat also goes with one to the 
other side of the river. And so when one reaches the destination, how 
can the same boat be available to those who are still on this side? To 
answer this difficulty, the demigods say in their prayer that the boat of 
the Lord’s lotus feet is not taken away. The devotees still remaining on 
this side are able to pass over the ocean of material nature because the 
pure devotees do not take the boat with them when they cross over. 
When one simply approaches the boat, the whole ocean of material 
nescience is reduced to the size of the water in a calf’s hoofprint. 
Therefore, the devotees do not need to take the boat to the other side: 
they simply cross the ocean immediately. Because the great saintly 
persons are compassionate toward all conditioned souls, the boat is still 
lying on this side. In other words, one can meditate upon the lotus feet 
of the Lord at any time, and by so doing one can cross over the great 
ocean of material existence. 
Meditation means concentration upon the lotus feet of the Lord. Lotus 
feet indicate the Supreme Personality of Godhead. But those who are 
impersonalists do not recognize the lotus feet of the Lord, and therefore 
their object of meditation is something impersonal. The demigods 
express their mature verdict that persons who are interested in 
meditating on something void or impersonal cannot cross over the ocean 
of nescience. Such persons are simply imagining that they have become 
liberated. “O lotus-eyed Lord! Their intelligence is contaminated 
because they fail to meditate upon the lotus feet of Your Lordship. As a 
result of this neglectful activity, the impersonalists fall down again into 
the material way of conditioned life, although they may temporarily rise 
to the point of impersonal realization.” Impersonalists undergo severe 
austerities and penances to merge themselves into the Brahman 
effulgence, or impersonal Brahman existence. But their minds are not 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
39
free from material contamination; they have simply tried to negate the 
material ways of thinking. That does not mean that they have become 
liberated. Thus they fall down. 
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that the impersonalist has to undergo 
great tribulation in realizing his ultimate goal. At the beginning of 
Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is also stated that without devotional service to 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one cannot achieve liberation 
from the bondage of fruitive activities. The statement of Lord Kåñëa is 
there in the Bhagavad-gétä, and in Çrémad-Bhägavatam the statement of 
the great sage Närada is there, and here also the demigods confirm it. 
“Persons who have not taken to devotional service are understood to 
have come short of the ultimate purpose of knowledge and are not 
favored by Your grace.” The impersonalists simply think that they are 
liberated, but actually they have no feeling for the Personality of 
Godhead. They think that when Kåñëa comes into the material world 
He accepts a material body. They therefore overlook the transcendental 
body of Kåñëa. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä: avajänanti 
mäà müòhäù. In spite of conquering material lust and rising to the point 
of liberation, the impersonalists fall down. If they are engaged just in 
knowing things for the sake of knowledge and do not take to the 
devotional service of the Lord, they cannot achieve the desired result. 
Their achievement is the trouble they take, and that is all. 
It is clearly stated in the Bhagavad-gétä that to realize Brahman 
identification is not all. Brahman identification may help one become 
joyful without material attachment or detachment and to achieve the 
platform of equanimity, but after this stage one has to take to devotional 
service. When one takes to devotional service after being elevated to the 
platform of Brahman realization, he is then admitted into the spiritual 
kingdom for permanent residence in association with the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. That is the result of devotional service. Those 
who are devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead never fall 
down like the impersonalists. Even if the devotees fall down, they 
remain affectionately attached to their Lord. They can meet all kinds of 
obstacles on the path of devotional service, and freely, without any fear, 
they can surmount such obstacles. Because of their surrender, they are 
certain that Kåñëa will always protect them. As it is promised by Kåñëa 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
40
in the Bhagavad-gétä, “My devotees are never vanquished.” 
“Our dear Lord,” the demigods continued, “You have appeared in Your 
original unalloyed form, the eternal form of goodness, for the welfare of 
all living entities within this material world. Taking advantage of Your 
appearance, all of them can now very easily understand the nature and 
form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Persons who belong to the 
four divisions of the social order (the brahmacärés, the gåhasthas, the 
vänaprasthas and the sannyäsés) can all take advantage of Your 
appearance. 
“Dear Lord, husband of the goddess of fortune, devotees who are 
dovetailed in Your service do not fall down from their high position like 
the impersonalists. Being protected by You, the devotees are able to 
traverse over the heads of many of Mäyä’s commanders in chief, who 
can always put stumbling blocks on the path of liberation. My dear Lord, 
You appear in Your eternal transcendental form for the benefit of the 
living entities so that they can see You face to face and offer their 
worshipful sacrifices by ritualistic performance of the Vedas, mystic 
meditation and devotional service as recommended in the scriptures. 
Dear Lord, if You did not appear in Your eternal transcendental form, 
full of bliss and knowledge—a form which can eradicate all kinds of 
speculative ignorance about Your position—then all people would 
simply speculate about You according to their respective modes of 
material nature.” 
The appearance of Kåñëa is the answer to all imaginative iconography of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone imagines the form of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead according to his mode of material 
nature. In the Brahma-saàhitä it is said that the Lord is the oldest 
person. Therefore a section of religionists imagine that God must be 
very old, and therefore they depict a form of the Lord like a very old 
man. But in the same Brahma-saàhitä, that is contradicted: although He 
is the oldest of all living entities, He has His eternal form as a fresh 
youth. The exact words used in this connection in Çrémad-Bhägavatam 
are vijïänam ajïäna-bhidäpamärjanam. Vijïänam means transcendental 
knowledge of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Vijïänam is also 
experienced knowledge. Transcendental knowledge has to be accepted 
by the descending process of disciplic succession as Brahmä presents the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
41
knowledge of Kåñëa in the Brahma-saàhitä. The Brahma-saàhitä is 
vijïänam as realized by Brahmä’s transcendental experience, and in that 
way he presented the form and the pastimes of Kåñëa in the 
transcendental abode. This knowledge is ajïäna-bhidäpamärjanam, that 
which can smash all kinds of speculation in ignorance. People are 
imagining the form of the Lord: sometimes He has no form and 
sometimes He has form, according to their different imaginations. But 
the presentation of Kåñëa in the Brahma-saàhitä is vijïänam—
scientific, experienced knowledge given by Lord Brahmä and accepted 
by Lord Caitanya. There is no doubt about it. Kåñëa’s form, Kåñëa’s flute, 
Kåñëa’s color—everything is reality. Here it is said that this vijïänam is 
always defeating all kinds of speculative knowledge. “Therefore, without 
Your appearing as Kåñëa, as You are, neither ajïäna-bhidä (the 
nescience of speculative knowledge) nor vijïänam would be realized. 
Ajïäna-bhidäpamärjanam—by Your appearance the speculative 
knowledge of ignorance will be vanquished, and the real experienced 
knowledge of authorities like Lord Brahmä will be established. Men 
influenced by the three modes of material nature imagine their own God 
according to the modes of material nature. In this way God is presented 
in various ways, but Your appearance will establish what the real form of 
God is.” 
The highest blunder committed by the impersonalists is to think that 
when the incarnation of God comes He accepts the form of matter in 
the mode of goodness. Actually the form of Kåñëa or Näräyaëa is 
transcendental to any material idea. Even the greatest impersonalist, 
Çaìkaräcärya, has admitted, näräyaëaù paro ’vyaktät: the material 
creation is caused by the avyakta (impersonal) manifestation of matter, 
or the nonphenomenal total reservoir of matter, but Kåñëa is 
transcendental to that material conception. That is expressed in Çrémad-
Bhägavatam as çuddha-sattva, or transcendental. He does not belong to 
the material mode of goodness, and He is above the position of material 
goodness. He belongs to the transcendental, eternal status of bliss and 
knowledge. 
“Dear Lord, when You appear in Your different incarnations, You take 
different names and forms according to different situations. Lord Kåñëa 
is Your name because You are all-attractive; You are called 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
42
Çyämasundara because of Your transcendental beauty. Çyäma means 
blackish, yet it is said that You are more beautiful than thousands of 
Cupids (kandarpa-koöi-kamanéya). Although You appear in a color 
which is compared to the blackish cloud, because You are 
Transcendental Absolute, Your beauty is many, many times more 
attractive than the delicate body of Cupid. Sometimes You are called 
Giridhäré because You lifted the hill known as Govardhana. You are 
sometimes called Nandanandana or Väsudeva or Devakénandana 
because You appear as the son of Mahäräja Nanda or Vasudeva or 
Devaké. Impersonalists think that Your many names or forms are 
according to a particular type of work and quality because they accept 
You from the position of a material observer. 
“Our dear Lord, the way of understanding is not to study Your absolute 
nature, form and activities by mental speculation. One must engage 
himself in devotional service; then one can understand Your absolute 
nature and Your transcendental form, name and qualities. Actually only 
a person who has a little taste for the service of Your lotus feet can 
understand Your transcendental nature or form and qualities. Others 
may go on speculating for millions of years, but it is not possible for them 
to understand even a single part of Your actual position.” In other 
words, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, cannot be 
understood by the nondevotees because there is a curtain of Yogamäyä 
which covers Kåñëa’s actual features. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä, 
nähaà prakäçaù sarvasya [Bg. 7.25]. The Lord says, “I am not exposed to 
anyone and everyone.” When Kåñëa came, He was actually present on 
the Battlefield of Kurukñetra, and everyone saw Him. But not everyone 
could understand that He was the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Still, everyone who died in His presence attained complete liberation 
from material bondage and was transferred to the spiritual world. 
“O Lord, the impersonalists or nondevotees cannot understand that 
Your name is identical with Your form.” Since the Lord is absolute, 
there is no difference between His name and His actual form. In the 
material world there is a difference between form and name. The mango 
fruit is different from the name of the mango. One cannot taste the 
mango fruit simply by chanting “mango, mango, mango.” But the 
devotee who knows that there is no difference between the name and 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
43
the form of the Lord chants Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare 
Hare / Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare and realizes that 
he is always in Kåñëa’s company. 
For persons who are not very advanced in absolute knowledge of the 
Supreme, Lord Kåñëa exhibits His transcendental pastimes. They can 
simply think of the pastimes of the Lord and get full benefit. Since there 
is no difference between the transcendental name and form of the Lord, 
there is no difference between the transcendental pastimes and the form 
of the Lord. For those who are less intelligent (like women, laborers or 
the mercantile class), the great sage Vyäsadeva wrote the Mahäbhärata. 
In the Mahäbhärata Kåñëa is present in His different activities. The 
Mahäbhärata is history, and simply by studying, hearing and memorizing 
the transcendental activities of Kåñëa, the less intelligent can also 
gradually rise to the standard of pure devotees. 
The pure devotees, who are always absorbed in the thought of the 
transcendental lotus feet of Kåñëa and who are always engaged in 
devotional service in full Kåñëa consciousness, are never to be 
considered to be in the material world. Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has 
explained that those who are always engaged in Kåñëa consciousness 
with body, mind and activities are to be considered liberated even 
within this body. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä: those who are 
engaged in the devotional service of the Lord have already transcended 
the material position. 
Kåñëa appears in order to give a chance to both the devotees and the 
nondevotees for realization of the ultimate goal of life. The devotees get 
the direct chance to see Him and worship Him. Those who are not on 
that platform get the chance to become acquainted with His activities 
and thus become elevated to the same position. 
“Our dear Lord, O supreme controller, when You appear on earth, all 
the demons like Kaàsa and Jaräsandha will be vanquished, and all good 
fortune will be ushered into the world. When You walk on the globe, 
Your lotus feet will impress on the ground the marks of Your sole, such 
as the flag, the trident and the thunderbolt. Thus You will grace both 
the earth and us on the heavenly planets who shall see those marks. 
“O dear Lord,” the demigods continued, “You are unborn; therefore we 
do not find any reason for Your appearance other than for Your 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
44
pleasurable pastimes.” Although the reason for the appearance of the 
Lord is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä (He descends just to give protection 
to the devotees and vanquish the nondevotees), actually He descends for 
His pleasure-meeting with the devotees, not really to vanquish the 
nondevotees. The nondevotees can be vanquished simply by one kick of 
material nature. “The actions and reactions of material nature (creation, 
maintenance and annihilation) are being carried out automatically. But 
simply by taking shelter of Your holy name the devotees are sufficiently 
protected, because Your holy name and Your personality are 
nondifferent.” The protection of the devotees and the annihilation of 
the nondevotees are actually not the business of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. When He descends, it is just for His 
transcendental pleasure. There cannot be any other reason for His 
appearance. 
“Our dear Lord, You are appearing as the best of the Yadu dynasty, and 
we are offering our respectful humble obeisances unto Your lotus feet. 
Before this appearance, You also appeared as the fish incarnation, as the 
horse incarnation, as the tortoise incarnation, as the half-man, half-lion 
incarnation, as the boar incarnation, as the swan incarnation, as King 
Rämacandra, as Paraçuräma and as many other incarnations. You 
appeared just to protect the devotees, and we request You in Your 
present appearance as the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself to 
give us similar protection all over the three worlds and remove all 
obstacles for the peaceful execution of our lives. 
“Dear mother Devaké, within your womb is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, appearing along with all His plenary extensions. He is the 
original Personality of Godhead, appearing for our welfare. Therefore 
you should not be afraid of your brother, the King of Bhoja. Your son 
Lord Kåñëa, who is the original Personality of Godhead, will appear for 
the protection of the pious Yadu dynasty. The Lord is appearing not 
alone but accompanied by His immediate plenary portion, Baladeva.” 
Devaké was very much afraid of her brother Kaàsa because he had 
already killed so many of her children. So she was very anxious about 
Kåñëa. In the Viñëu Puräëa it is stated that in order to pacify Devaké, all 
the demigods, along with their wives, used to visit her to encourage her 
not to be afraid that her son would be killed by Kaàsa. Kåñëa, who was 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
45
within her womb, was to appear not only to diminish the burden of the 
world but specifically to protect the interests of the Yadu dynasty, and 
certainly to protect Devaké and Vasudeva. It is understood that Kåñëa 
had been transferred from the mind of Vasudeva to the mind of Devaké, 
and from there to her womb. Thus all the demigods worshiped Devaké, 
the mother of Kåñëa. 
After thus worshiping the transcendental form of the Lord, all the 
demigods, with Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva placed in front, departed for 
their heavenly abodes. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Second Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Kåñëa in the Womb.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
46
CHAPTER THREE 
The Birth of Lord Kåñëa 
 
In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord says that His appearance, birth and 
activities are all transcendental and that one who understands them 
factually becomes immediately eligible to be transferred to the spiritual 
world. The Lord’s appearance or birth is not like that of an ordinary 
man, who is forced to accept a material body according to his past deeds. 
The Lord’s appearance is explained in the Second Chapter: He appears 
out of His own sweet pleasure. When the time was mature for the 
appearance of the Lord, the constellations became very auspicious. The 
astrological influence of the star known as Rohiëé was predominant. 
This star is considered to be very auspicious and is under the direct 
supervision of Brahmä. According to the astrological conclusion, besides 
the proper situation of the stars, there are auspicious and inauspicious 
moments due to the different situations of the different planetary 
systems. At the time of Kåñëa’s birth, the planetary systems were 
automatically adjusted so that everything became auspicious. 
At that time, in all directions—east, west, south, north, everywhere—
there was an atmosphere of peace and prosperity. There were auspicious 
stars visible in the sky, and on the surface in all towns and villages and 
pasturing grounds and within the minds of everyone there were signs of 
good fortune. The rivers were flowing full of waters, and lakes were 
beautifully decorated with lotus flowers. The forests were full with 
beautiful birds and peacocks. All the birds within the forests began to 
sing with sweet voices, and the peacocks began to dance along with their 
consorts. The wind blew very pleasantly, carrying the aroma of different 
flowers, and the sensation of bodily touch was very pleasing. At home, 
the brähmaëas, who were accustomed to offering sacrifices in the fire, 
found their homes very pleasant for offerings. Due to disturbances 
created by the demoniac kings, the sacrificial fire had been almost 
stopped in the houses of brähmaëas, but now they could find the 
opportunity to start the fire peacefully. Being forbidden to offer 
sacrifices, the brähmaëas had been very much distressed in mind, 
intelligence and activities, but just on the point of Kåñëa’s appearance, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
47
automatically their minds became full of joy because they could hear 
transcendental vibrations in the sky proclaiming the appearance of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
The denizens of the Gandharva and Kinnara planets began to sing, and 
the denizens of Siddhaloka and the planets of the Cäraëas began to offer 
prayers in the service of the Personality of Godhead. In the heavenly 
planets, the angels along with their wives, as well as the Vidyädharas 
along with their wives, began to dance. 
The great sages and the demigods, being pleased, began to shower 
flowers. At the seashore there was the sound of mild waves, and above 
the sea there were clouds in the sky which began to thunder very 
pleasingly. 
When things were adjusted like this, Lord Viñëu, who is residing within 
the heart of every living entity, appeared in the darkness of night as the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead before Devaké, who also appeared as 
one of the demigoddesses. The appearance of Lord Viñëu at that time 
could be compared to the rising of the full moon over the eastern 
horizon. The objection may be raised that since Lord Kåñëa appeared on 
the eighth day of the waning moon, there could be no rising of the full 
moon. In answer to this it may be said that Lord Kåñëa appeared in the 
dynasty which is in the hierarchy of the moon; therefore, although the 
moon was incomplete on that night, because of the Lord’s appearance in 
the dynasty wherein the moon is himself the original person, the moon 
was in an overjoyous condition, so by the grace of Kåñëa he could appear 
just as a full moon. 
In an astronomical treatise by the name Khamaëikya, the constellations 
at the time of the appearance of Lord Kåñëa are very nicely described. It 
is confirmed that the child born at that auspicious moment was the 
Supreme Brahman, or the Absolute Truth. 
Vasudeva saw that wonderful child born as a baby with four hands, 
holding conchshell, club, disc and lotus flower, decorated with the mark 
of Çrévatsa, wearing the jeweled necklace of kaustubha stone, dressed in 
yellow silk, appearing dazzling like a bright blackish cloud, wearing a 
helmet bedecked with the vaidürya stone, valuable bracelets, earrings 
and similar other ornaments all over His body and an abundance of hair 
on His head. Due to the extraordinary features of the child, Vasudeva 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
48
was struck with wonder. How could a newly born child be so decorated? 
He could therefore understand that Lord Kåñëa had now appeared, and 
he became overpowered by the occasion. Vasudeva very humbly 
wondered that although he was an ordinary living entity conditioned by 
material nature and was externally imprisoned by Kaàsa, the all-
pervading Personality of Godhead, Viñëu, or Kåñëa, was appearing as a 
child in his home, exactly in His original position. No earthly child is 
born with four hands, decorated with ornaments and nice clothing, fully 
equipped with all the signs of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Over and over again Vasudeva glanced at his child, and he considered 
how to celebrate this auspicious moment: “Generally, when a male child 
is born,” he thought, “people observe the occasion with jubilant 
celebrations, and in my home, although I am imprisoned, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead has taken birth. How many millions and 
millions of times should I be prepared to observe this auspicious 
ceremony!” 
When Vasudeva, who is also called Änakadundubhi, was looking at his 
newborn baby, he was so happy that he wanted to give many thousands 
of cows in charity to the brähmaëas. According to the Vedic system, 
whenever there is an auspicious ceremony in the kñatriya king’s palace, 
out of joy the king gives many things in charity. Cows decorated with 
golden ornaments are delivered to the brähmaëas and sages. Vasudeva 
wanted to perform a charitable ceremony to celebrate Kåñëa’s 
appearance, but because he was shackled within the walls of Kaàsa’s 
prison, this was not possible. Instead, within his mind he gave thousands 
of cows to the brähmaëas. 
When Vasudeva was convinced that the newborn child was the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, he bowed down with folded 
hands and began to offer Him prayers. At that time Vasudeva was in the 
transcendental position, and he became completely free from all fear of 
Kaàsa. The newborn baby was also flashing His effulgence within the 
room in which He appeared. 
Vasudeva then began to offer his prayers. “My dear Lord, I can 
understand who You are. You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
the Supersoul of all living entities and the Absolute Truth. You have 
appeared in Your own eternal form, which is directly perceived by us. I 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
49
understand that because I am afraid of Kaàsa You have appeared just to 
deliver me from that fear. You do not belong to this material world; You 
are the same person who brings about the cosmic manifestation simply 
by glancing over material nature.” 
One may argue that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who creates 
the whole cosmic manifestation simply by His glance, cannot come 
within the womb of Devaké, the wife of Vasudeva. To eradicate this 
argument, Vasudeva said, “My dear Lord, it is not a very wonderful thing 
that You have appeared within the womb of Devaké, because the 
creation was also made in that way. You were lying in the Causal Ocean 
as Mahä-Viñëu, and by Your breathing process, innumerable universes 
came into existence. Then You entered into each of the universes as 
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu. Then again You expanded Yourself as 
Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu and entered into the hearts of all living entities and 
even within the atoms. Therefore Your entrance into the womb of 
Devaké is understandable in the same way. You appear to have entered, 
but You are simultaneously all-pervading. We can understand Your 
entrance and nonentrance from material examples. The total material 
energy remains intact even after being divided into sixteen elements. 
The material body is nothing but the combination of the five gross 
elements—namely earth, water, fire, air and ether. Whenever there is a 
material body, it appears that such elements are newly created, but 
actually the elements are always existing outside of the body. Similarly, 
although You have appeared as a child in the womb of Devaké, You are 
also existing outside. You are always in Your abode, but still You can 
simultaneously expand Yourself into millions of forms. 
“One has to understand Your appearance with great intelligence because 
the material energy is also emanating from You. You are the original 
source of the material energy, just as the sun is the source of the 
sunshine. The sunshine cannot cover the sun globe, nor can the material 
energy—being an emanation from You—cover You. You appear to be in 
the three modes of material energy, but actually the three modes of 
material energy cannot cover You. This is understood by the highly 
intellectual philosophers. In other words, although You appear to be 
within the material energy, You are never covered by it.” 
We hear from the Vedic version that the Supreme Brahman exhibits His 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
50
effulgence and therefore everything becomes illuminated. We can 
understand from the Brahma-saàhitä that the brahmajyoti, or the 
Brahman effulgence, emanates from the body of the Supreme Lord. And 
from the Brahman effulgence, all creation takes place. It is also stated in 
the Bhagavad-gétä that the Lord is the support of the Brahman 
effulgence. Therefore, originally He is the root cause of everything. But 
persons who are less intelligent think that when the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead comes within this material world, He accepts 
the material qualities. Such conclusions are not very mature but are 
made by the less intelligent. 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is directly and indirectly existing 
everywhere; He is outside this material creation, and He is also within it. 
He is within this material creation not only as Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu; 
He is also within the atom. The existence of the atom is due to His 
presence. Nothing can be separated from His existence. In the Vedic 
injunctions we find that the Supreme Soul, or the root cause of 
everything, has to be searched out because nothing exists independently 
of the Supreme Soul. Therefore the material manifestation is also a 
transformation of His potency. Both inert matter and the living force—
the soul—are emanations from Him. Only the foolish conclude that 
when the Supreme Lord appears He accepts the conditions of matter. 
Even if He appears to have accepted the material body, He is still not 
subjected to any material condition. Kåñëa has therefore appeared and 
defeated all imperfect conclusions about the appearance and 
disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
“My Lord, Your appearance, existence and disappearance are beyond the 
influence of the material qualities. Because Your Lordship is the 
Supreme Brahman and the controller of everything, there is nothing 
inconceivable or contradictory in You. As You have said, material 
nature works under Your superintendence, just like a government 
officer working under the orders of the chief executive. The influence of 
subordinate activities cannot affect You. Since You are the Supreme 
Brahman, everything is existing within You, and since all the activities 
of material nature are controlled by Your Lordship, none of these 
activities affect You. 
“You are called çuklam. Çuklam, or “whiteness,’ is the symbolic 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
51
representation of the Absolute Truth because it is unaffected by the 
material qualities. Lord Brahmä is called rakta, or red, because Brahmä 
represents the quality of passion for creation. Darkness is entrusted to 
Lord Çiva because he annihilates the cosmos. The creation, annihilation 
and maintenance of this cosmic manifestation are conducted by Your 
potencies, yet You are always unaffected by those qualities. As 
confirmed in the Vedas, harir hi nirguëaù säkñät: the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead is always free from all material qualities. It is also 
said that the qualities of passion and ignorance are nonexistent in the 
person of the Supreme Lord. 
“My Lord, You are the supreme controller, the Personality of Godhead, 
the supreme great, maintaining the order of this cosmic manifestation. 
Yet in spite of Your being the supreme controller, You have so kindly 
appeared in my home. The purpose of Your appearance is to kill the 
followers of the demoniac rulers of the world, who are in the dress of 
royal princes but are actually demons. I am sure that You will kill all of 
them and their followers and soldiers. 
“I understand that You have appeared in order to kill the uncivilized 
Kaàsa and his followers. But knowing that You were to appear in order 
to kill him and his followers, he has already killed so many of Your 
predecessors, Your elder brothers. Now he is simply awaiting the news of 
Your birth. As soon as he hears about it, he will immediately appear with 
all kinds of weapons to kill You.” 
After this prayer of Vasudeva, Devaké, the mother of Kåñëa, offered her 
prayers. She was very frightened because of her brother’s atrocities. 
Devaké said, “My dear Lord, Your eternal forms, like Näräyaëa, Lord 
Räma, Hayaçérña, Varäha, Nåsiàha, Vämana, Baladeva and millions of 
similar incarnations emanating from Viñëu, are described in the Vedic 
literature as original. You are original because all Your forms as 
incarnations are outside of this material creation. Your form was 
existing before this cosmic manifestation was created. Your forms are 
eternal and all-pervading. They are self-effulgent, changeless and 
uncontaminated by the material qualities. Such eternal forms are 
evercognizant and full of bliss; they are situated in transcendental 
goodness and are always engaged in different pastimes. You are not 
limited to a particular form only; all such transcendental, eternal forms 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
52
are self-sufficient. I can understand that You are the Supreme Lord 
Viñëu. 
“After many millions of years, when Lord Brahmä comes to the end of 
his life, the annihilation of the cosmic manifestation takes place. At that 
time the five elements—namely earth, water, fire, air and ether—enter 
into the mahat-tattva. The mahat-tattva then enters, by the force of time, 
into the nonmanifested total material energy, the total material energy 
enters into the energetic pradhäna, and the pradhäna enters into You. 
Therefore after the annihilation of the whole cosmic manifestation, You 
alone remain with Your transcendental name, form, qualities and 
paraphernalia. 
“My Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You because You are the 
director of the unmanifested total energy and the ultimate reservoir of 
the material nature. My Lord, the whole cosmic manifestation is under 
the influence of time, beginning from the moment up to the duration of 
the year. All act under Your direction. You are the original director of 
everything and the reservoir of all potent energies. 
“All the conditioned souls are continually fleeing from one body to 
another and one planet to another, yet they do not get free from the 
onslaught of birth and death. But when one of these fearful living 
entities comes under the shelter of Your lotus feet, he can lie down 
without anxiety of being attacked by formidable death.” This statement 
by Devaké is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä by the Lord Himself. There 
the Lord says that even after traveling all over the universe, from 
Brahmaloka to Pätälaloka, one cannot escape the attack of birth, death, 
disease and old age. But one who enters the kingdom of God, the Lord 
says, is never again obliged to come to the material world. 
“Therefore, my Lord, I request You to save me from the cruel hands of 
the son of Ugrasena, Kaàsa. I am praying to Your Lordship to please 
rescue me from this fearful condition because You are always ready to 
give protection to Your servitors.” The Lord has confirmed this 
statement in the Bhagavad-gétä by assuring Arjuna, “You may declare to 
the world, My devotee shall never be vanquished.” 
While thus praying to the Lord for rescue, mother Devaké nonetheless 
expressed her motherly affection: “I understand that this transcendental 
form is generally perceived in meditation by the great sages, but I am 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
53
still afraid because as soon as Kaàsa understands that You have 
appeared, he might harm You. So I request that for the time being You 
become invisible to our material eyes.” In other words, she requested the 
Lord to assume the form of an ordinary child. “My only cause of fear 
from my brother Kaàsa is due to Your appearance. My Lord 
Madhusüdana, Kaàsa may not know that You are already born. 
Therefore I request You to conceal this four-armed form of Your 
Lordship, which holds the four symbols of Viñëu—namely the 
conchshell, the disc, the club and the lotus flower. My dear Lord, at the 
end of the annihilation of the cosmic manifestation, You put the whole 
universe within Your abdomen; still by Your unalloyed mercy You have 
appeared in my womb. I am surprised that You imitate the activities of 
ordinary human beings just to please Your devotee.” 
On hearing the prayers of Devaké, the Lord replied, “My dear mother, in 
the millennium of Sväyambhuva Manu, My father Vasudeva was living 
as one of the Prajäpatis. His name at that time was Sutapä, and you were 
his wife named Påçni. At that time, when Lord Brahmä was desiring to 
increase the population, he requested you to generate offspring. You 
controlled your senses and performed severe austerities. By practicing 
the breathing exercises of the yoga system, both you and your husband 
could tolerate all the influences of the material laws: the rainy season, 
the onslaught of the wind, and the scorching heat of the sunshine. You 
also executed all religious principles. In this way you were able to cleanse 
your heart and control the influences of material laws. In executing your 
austerity, you used to eat only the leaves of the trees which fell to the 
ground. Then with a steady mind and controlled sex drive, you 
worshiped Me, desiring some wonderful benediction from Me. Both of 
you practiced severe austerities for twelve thousand years by the 
calculation of the demigods. During that time, your mind was always 
absorbed in Me. When you were executing devotional service and always 
thinking of Me within your heart, I was very much pleased with you. O 
sinless mother, your heart is therefore always pure. At that time also I 
appeared before you in this form just to fulfill your desire, and I asked 
you to ask whatever you desired. At that time you wished to have Me 
born as your son. Although you saw Me personally, instead of asking for 
your complete liberation from material bondage, under the influence of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
54
My energy you asked Me to become your son.” 
In other words, to appear in the material world the Lord selected His 
mother and father—namely Påçni and Sutapä, respectively. Whenever 
the Lord comes as a human being, He must have a mother and a father, 
so He selected Påçni and Sutapä perpetually as His mother and father. 
And on account of this, neither Påçni nor Sutapä could ask the Lord for 
liberation. Liberation is not so important as the transcendental loving 
service of the Lord. The Lord could have awarded Påçni and Sutapä 
immediate liberation, but He preferred to keep them within this 
material world for His different appearances, as will be explained in the 
following verses. On receiving the benediction from the Lord to become 
His father and mother, both Påçni and Sutapä retired from the activities 
of austerity and lived as husband and wife in order to beget a child who 
was the Supreme Lord Himself. 
In due course of time Påçni became pregnant and gave birth to the child. 
The Lord spoke to Devaké and Vasudeva: “At that time My name was 
Påçnigarbha. In the next millennium you took birth as Aditi and 
Kaçyapa, and I became your child of the name Upendra. At that time 
My form was just like a dwarf, and for this reason I was known as 
Vämanadeva. I gave you the benediction that I would take birth as your 
son three times. The first time I was known as Påçnigarbha, born of Påçni 
and Sutapä, the next birth I was Upendra, born of Aditi and Kaçyapa, 
and now for the third time I am born as Kåñëa from you, Devaké and 
Vasudeva. I have appeared in this Viñëu form just to convince you that I 
am the same Supreme Personality of Godhead again taken birth. I could 
have appeared just like an ordinary child, but in that way you would not 
have believed that the Supreme Personality of Godhead had taken birth 
in your womb. My dear father and mother, you have therefore raised Me 
many times as your child, with great affection and love, and I am 
therefore very pleased and obliged to you. And I assure you that this 
time you shall go back home, back to Godhead, on account of your 
perfection in your mission. I know you are very concerned about Me and 
afraid of Kaàsa. Therefore I order you to take Me immediately to 
Gokula and exchange Me with the daughter who has just been born to 
Yaçodä.” 
Having spoken thus to His father and mother, the Lord turned Himself 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
55
into an ordinary child in their presence and remained silent. 
Being ordered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vasudeva 
prepared to take his son from the delivery room, and exactly at that 
time, a daughter was born to Nanda and Yaçodä. She was Yogamäyä, the 
internal potency of the Lord. By the influence of this internal potency, 
Yogamäyä, all the residents of Kaàsa’s palace, especially the 
doorkeepers, were overwhelmed with deep sleep, and all the palace doors 
opened, although they were barred and shackled with iron chains. The 
night was very dark, but as soon as Vasudeva took Kåñëa on his lap and 
went out, he could see everything just as in the sunlight. 
In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is said that Kåñëa is just like sunlight and 
that wherever there is Kåñëa, the illusory energy, which is compared to 
darkness, cannot remain. When Vasudeva was carrying Kåñëa, the 
darkness of the night disappeared. All the prison doors automatically 
opened. At the same time there was thunder in the sky and severe 
rainfall. While Vasudeva was carrying his son Kåñëa in the falling rain, 
Lord Çeña in the shape of a serpent spread His hood over the head of 
Vasudeva so that he would not be hampered by the rainfall. Vasudeva 
came onto the bank of the Yamunä and saw that the water of the 
Yamunä was roaring with waves and that the whole span was full of 
foam. Still, in that furious feature, the river gave passage to Vasudeva to 
cross, just as the great Indian Ocean gave a path to Lord Räma when He 
was bridging over the gulf. In this way Vasudeva crossed the river 
Yamunä. On the other side, he went to the place of Nanda Mahäräja, 
situated in Gokula, where he saw that all the cowherd men were fast 
asleep. He took the opportunity of silently entering into the house of 
Yaçodä, and without difficulty he exchanged his son with the baby girl 
newly born in the house of Yaçodä. Then, after entering the house very 
silently and exchanging the boy with the girl, he returned to the prison 
of Kaàsa and silently put the girl on the lap of Devaké. He again 
clamped the shackles on himself so that Kaàsa could not recognize that 
so many things had happened. 
Mother Yaçodä understood that a child was born to her, but because she 
was very tired from the labor of childbirth, she was fast asleep. When 
she awoke, she could not remember whether she had given birth to a 
male or a female child. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
56
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Third Chapter of Kåñëa, “The 
Birth of Lord Kåñëa.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
57
 
CHAPTER FOUR 
Kaàsa Begins His Persecutions 
 
After Vasudeva adjusted things as they had been before he carried 
Kåñëa to Gokula, and all the doors and gates became similarly closed, the 
gatekeepers awoke and heard the newborn child crying. Kaàsa was 
waiting to hear the news of the child’s birth, and the gatekeepers 
immediately approached him and informed him that the child was born. 
At that time, Kaàsa got up from his bed very quickly and exclaimed, 
“Now the cruel death of my life is born!” Kaàsa became perplexed now 
that his death was approaching, and his hair scattered. Immediately he 
proceeded toward the place where the child was born. 
Devaké, on seeing her brother approaching, prayed in a very meek 
attitude to Kaàsa: “My dear brother, please do not kill this female child. 
I promise that this child will be the wife of your son; therefore don’t kill 
her. You are not to be killed by any female child. That was the prophecy. 
You are to be killed by a male child, so please do not kill her. My dear 
brother, you have killed so many of my children who were just born, 
shining as the sun. That is not your fault. You have been advised by 
demoniac friends to kill my children. But now I beg you to excuse this 
girl at least. Let her live as my daughter.” 
Kaàsa was so cruel that he did not listen to the pitiful prayers of his 
sister Devaké. He forcibly grabbed the newborn child to rebuke his sister 
and attempted to dash her on the stone mercilessly. This is a graphic 
example of a cruel demon who could sacrifice all relationships for the 
sake of personal gratification. But the child immediately slipped out of 
his hands, went up into the sky and appeared with eight arms as the 
younger sister of Viñëu. She was decorated with nice garments and 
flower garlands and ornaments; in her eight hands she held a bow, lance, 
arrows, sword, conchshell, disc, club and shield. 
Seeing the appearance of the child (who was actually the goddess 
Durgä), all the demigods from different planets like Siddhaloka, 
Cäraëaloka, Gandharvaloka, Apsaroloka, Kinnaraloka and Uragaloka 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
58
presented her with various articles and began to offer their respective 
prayers. From above, the goddess addressed Kaàsa: “You rascal, how can 
you kill me? The child who will kill you is already born before me 
somewhere within this world. Don’t be so cruel to your poor sister.” 
After this appearance, the goddess Durgä became known by various 
names in various parts of the world. 
After hearing these words, Kaàsa became very much overwhelmed with 
fear. Out of pity, he immediately released Vasudeva and Devaké from the 
bondage of their shackles and very politely began to address them. He 
said, “My dear sister and brother-in-law, I have acted just like a demon 
in killing my own nephews—your children—and thereby I have given 
up all consideration of our intimate relationship. I do not know what 
will be the result of these envious acts of mine. Probably I shall be sent 
to the hell where killers of brähmaëas go. I am surprised, however, that 
the celestial prophecy has not come true. It is not only in human society 
that false propaganda is found. Now it appears that even the celestial 
denizens speak lies. Because I believed in the words of the celestial 
denizens, I have committed so many sins by killing the children of my 
sister. My dear Vasudeva and Devaké, you are both very great souls. I 
have no instructions to give you, but still I request that you not be sorry 
for the death of your children. Every one of us is under the control of 
superior power, and that superior power does not allow us to remain 
together. We are bound to be separated from our friends and relatives in 
due course of time. But we must know for certain that even after the 
disappearance of the different material bodies, the soul remains intact 
eternally. For example, there are many pots made of earthly clay, and 
they are prepared and also broken. But in spite of this, the earth remains 
as it is perpetually. Similarly, the bodies of the soul under different 
conditions are made and destroyed, but the spirit soul remains eternally. 
So there is nothing to lament over. Everyone should understand that 
this material body is different from the spirit soul, and so long as one 
does not come to that understanding, he is sure to accept the processes 
of transmigration from one body to another.  
My dear sister Devaké, you are so gentle and kind. Please excuse me—
don’t be aggrieved by the death of your children, which I have caused. 
Actually this was not done by me, because all these are predestined 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
59
activities. One has to act according to the predestined plan, even 
unwillingly. People misunderstand that with the end of the body the self 
dies, or they think that one can kill another living entity. All these 
misconceptions oblige one to accept the conditions of material 
existence. In other words, as long as one is not firmly convinced of the 
eternality of the soul, one is subjected to the tribulation of being killer 
and killed. My dear sister Devaké and brother-in-law Vasudeva, kindly 
excuse the atrocities I have committed against you. I am very poor-
hearted, and you are so great-hearted, so take compassion upon me and 
excuse me.” 
While Kaàsa was speaking to his brother-in-law and sister, tears flowed 
from his eyes, and he fell down at their feet. Believing the words of 
Durgä-devé, whom he had tried to kill, Kaàsa immediately released his 
brother-in-law and sister. He personally unlocked the iron shackles and 
very sympathetically showed his friendship for his family members. 
When Devaké saw her brother so repentant, she also became pacified 
and forgot all his atrocious activities against her children. Vasudeva also, 
forgetting all past incidents, spoke smilingly with his brother-in-law. 
Vasudeva told Kaàsa, “My dear fortunate brother-in-law, what you are 
saying about the material body and the soul is correct. Every living 
entity is born ignorant, misunderstanding this material body to be his 
self. This conception of life is due to ignorance, and on the basis of this 
ignorance we create enmity or friendship. Lamentation, jubilation, 
fearfulness, envy, greed, illusion and madness are different features of 
our material concept of life. A person influenced like this engages in 
enmityonly  due to the material body. Being engaged in such activities, 
we forget our eternal relationship with the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead.” 
Vasudeva took the opportunity of Kaàsa’s benevolence and informed 
him that his atheistic activities were also due to this misconception of 
life—namely taking the material body to be the self. When Vasudeva 
talked with Kaàsa in such an illuminating way, Kaàsa became very 
much pleased, and his guilt for killing his nephews subsided. With the 
permission of his sister Devaké and brother-in-law Vasudeva, he 
returned to his home with a relieved mind. 
But the next day Kaàsa called all his counselors together and narrated 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
60
to them all the incidents that had happened the night before. All the 
counselors of Kaàsa were demons and eternal enemies of the demigods, 
so they became depressed upon hearing their master speak of the night’s 
events. And although they were not very much experienced or learned, 
they began to give instructions to Kaàsa as follows: “Dear sir, let us now 
make arrangements to kill all children who were born within the last ten 
days in all towns, counties, villages and pasturing grounds. Let us 
execute this plan indiscriminately. We think that the demigods cannot 
do anything against us if we perform these atrocities. They are always 
afraid of fighting with us, and even if they wish to check our activities, 
they will not dare to do so. Because of your immeasurable strength, they 
fear your bow. Indeed, we have practical experience that whenever you 
stood to fight with them and began to shower your arrows on them, they 
immediately fled in all directions just to save their lives. Many of the 
demigods were unable to fight with you, and they immediately 
surrendered themselves unto you by loosening their turbans and the 
tufts of hair on their heads. With folded hands they begged you to spare 
them and said, “My lord, we are all afraid of your strength. Please release 
us from this dangerous fight.’ We have also seen many times that you 
would never kill such surrendered fighters when they were all fearful, 
their bows, arrows and chariots broken, forgetful of their military 
activities and unable to fight with you. So actually we have nothing to 
fear from these demigods. They are very proud of being great fighters in 
peacetime outside the war field, but actually they cannot show any 
talent or military power on the war field. Although Lord Viñëu, Lord 
Çiva and Lord Brahmä are always ready to help the demigods, headed by 
Indra, we have no reason to be afraid of them. As far as Lord Viñëu is 
concerned, He has already hidden Himself within the hearts of all living 
entities, and He cannot come out. As far as Lord Çiva is concerned, he 
has renounced all activities; he has already entered into the forest. And 
Lord Brahmä is always engaged in different types of austerities and 
meditation. And what to speak of Indra—he is a straw in comparison to 
your strength. Therefore we have nothing to fear from any of these 
demigods. But we must not neglect them, for the demigods are our 
determined enemies. We must be careful to protect ourselves. To root 
them out from their very existence, we should just engage ourselves in 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
61
your service and be always ready for your command.” 
The demons continued to say, “If there is some disease in the body 
which is neglected, it worsens and becomes incurable. Similarly, when 
one is not careful about restraining the senses and lets them loose, it is 
then very difficult to control them. Therefore, we must now be very 
careful of the demigods before they get too strong to be subdued. The 
foundation of strength of the demigods is Lord Viñëu, because the 
ultimate goal of all religious principles is to satisfy Him. The Vedic 
injunctions, the brähmaëas, the cows, austerities, sacrifices, 
performances of charity and distribution of wealth are all for the 
satisfaction of Lord Viñëu. So let us immediately begin by killing all the 
brähmaëas who are in charge of the Vedic knowledge and the great sages 
who are in charge of sacrificial ritualistic performances. Let us kill all 
the cows, which are the source of butter, which is so necessary for 
performing sacrifices. Please give us your permission to kill all these 
creatures. 
“Actually the limbs of the transcendental body of Lord Viñëu are the 
brähmaëas, the cows, Vedic knowledge, austerity, truthfulness, sense and 
mind control, faithfulness, charity, tolerance and performance of 
sacrifices. Lord Viñëu is situated in everyone’s heart and is the leader of 
all demigods, including Lord Çiva and Lord Brahmä. Therefore we think 
that to persecute the great sages and brähmaëas is to kill Lord Viñëu.” 
Thus being advised by his demoniac ministers, Kaàsa, who was from the 
very beginning the greatest rascal, decided to persecute the brähmaëas 
and Vaiñëavas, being entrapped by the shackles of all-devouring, eternal 
time. He ordered the demons to harass all kinds of saintly persons, and 
then he entered his house. The adherents of Kaàsa were all influenced 
by the mode of passion as well as illusioned by the mode of ignorance, 
and their only business was to create enmity with saintly persons. Such 
activities can only reduce one’s duration of life. The demons accelerated 
the process and invited their deaths as soon as possible. The result of 
persecuting saintly persons is not only untimely death. The act is so 
offensive that the perpetrator also gradually loses his beauty, his fame 
and his religious principles, and thus his promotion to higher planets is 
checked. Driven by various kinds of mental concoctions, the demons 
diminish all kinds of auspiciousness. An offense at the lotus feet of the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
62
devotees and brähmaëas is a greater offense than that committed at the 
lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. A civilization that 
commits such sinful activities generally loses all faith in the Supreme 
Lord, and such a godless civilization becomes the source of all calamities 
in human society. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Fourth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Kaàsa Begins His Persecutions.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
63
CHAPTER FIVE 
The Meeting of Nanda and Vasudeva 
 
Although Kåñëa was the real son of Vasudeva and Devaké, because of 
Kaàsa’s atrocious activities Vasudeva could not enjoy the birth 
ceremony of his son. But Nanda Mahäräja, the foster father, celebrated 
the birth ceremony of Kåñëa very joyfully. The next day, it was declared 
that a male child had been born to Yaçodä. According to Vedic custom, 
Nanda Mahäräja called for learned astrologers and brähmaëas to 
perform the birth ceremony. After the birth of a child, the astrologers 
calculate the moment of the birth and make a horoscope of the child’s 
future life. Another ceremony takes place after the birth of the child: 
the family members take baths, cleanse themselves and decorate 
themselves with ornaments and nice garments; then they come before 
the child and the astrologer to hear of the future life of the child. Nanda 
Mahäräja and other members of the family dressed and sat down in front 
of the birthplace. All the brähmaëas who were assembled there on this 
occasion chanted auspicious mantras, according to the rituals, while the 
astrologers performed the birth ceremony. All the demigods are also 
worshiped on this occasion, as well as the forefathers of the family. 
Nanda Mahäräja distributed to the brähmaëas 200,000 cows, which were 
well decorated with cloth and ornaments. He gave the brähmaëas not 
only cows in charity but also hills of grain decorated with ornaments and 
golden-bordered cloth. 
In the material world we possess riches and wealth in many ways, but 
sometimes not in very honest and pious ways, because that is the nature 
of accumulating wealth. According to Vedic injunction, therefore, one 
should purify such wealth by giving cows and gold in charity to the 
brähmaëas. A newborn child is also purified by gifts of grains in charity 
to the brähmaëas. In this material world it is to be understood that we 
are always living in a contaminated state. We therefore have to purify 
the duration of our lives, our possession of wealth and our self. We can 
purify our duration of life by taking daily bath and cleansing the body 
inside and outside and accepting the ten kinds of purificatory processes. 
By austerities, by worship of the Lord, and by distribution of charity, we 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
64
can purify the possession of wealth. We can purify our self by studying 
the Vedas in order to understand the Absolute Truth and achieve self-
realization. It is therefore stated in the Vedic literature that by birth 
everyone is born a çüdra, that by accepting the purificatory process one 
becomes twice-born, that by studying the Vedas one becomes a vipra, 
which is the preliminary qualification for becoming a brähmaëa, and 
that when one perfectly understands the Absolute Truth he is called a 
brähmaëa. And when the brähmaëa reaches further perfection, he 
becomes a Vaiñëava, or a devotee. 
In that ceremony, all the assembled brähmaëas began to chant different 
kinds of Vedic mantras to invoke all good fortune for the child. There 
are different kinds of chanting, known as süta, mägadha, vandéja and 
virudävalé. Along with this chanting of mantras and songs, bugles and 
kettledrums are sounded outside the house. On this occasion, the joyous 
vibrations could be heard in all the pasturing grounds and all the houses. 
Within and outside of the houses there were varieties of artistic 
paintings, done with rice pulp, and scented water was sprinkled 
everywhere, even on the roads and streets. Ceilings and roofs were 
decorated with different kinds of flags, festoons and green leaves. The 
gates were made of green leaves and flowers. All the cows, bulls and 
calves were smeared with a mixture of oil and turmeric and painted with 
minerals like red oxide, yellow clay and manganese. They wore garlands 
of peacock feathers and were covered with nice colored cloths and gold 
necklaces. 
When all the ecstatic cowherd men heard that Nanda Mahäräja, the 
father of Kåñëa, was celebrating the birth ceremony of his son, they 
became spontaneously joyful. They dressed themselves with very costly 
garments and ornamented their bodies with different kinds of earrings 
and necklaces and wore great turbans on their heads. After dressing 
themselves in this gorgeous way, they took various kinds of presentations 
and thus approached the house of Nanda Mahäräja. 
As soon as they heard that mother Yaçodä had given birth to a child, all 
the cowherd women became overwhelmed with joy, and they also 
dressed themselves with various kinds of costly garments and ornaments 
and smeared scented cosmetics on their bodies. 
As the dust on the lotus flower exhibits the exquisite beauty of the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
65
flower, all the gopés (cowherd women) applied the dust of kuìkuma on 
their lotuslike faces. These beautiful gopés took their different 
presentations and very soon reached the house of Mahäräja Nanda. 
Overburdened with their heavy hips and swollen breasts, the gopés could 
not proceed very quickly towards the house of Nanda Mahäräja, but out 
of ecstatic love for Kåñëa they proceeded as quickly as possible. Their 
ears were decorated with pearl rings, their necks were decorated with 
jewel lockets, their lips and eyes were decorated with different kinds of 
lipstick and ointment, and their hands were decorated with nice golden 
bangles. As they were very hastily passing over the stone road, the 
flower garlands which were decorating their bodies fell to the ground, 
and it appeared that a shower of flowers was falling from the sky. From 
the movement of the different kinds of ornaments on their bodies, they 
were looking still more beautiful. In this way, they all reached the house 
of Nanda-Yaçodä and blessed the child: “Dear child, You live long just to 
protect us.” While they were blessing child Kåñëa in this way, they 
offered a mixture of turmeric powder, oil, yogurt, milk and water. They 
sprinkled this mixture not only on the body of child Kåñëa but on all 
other persons who were present there. Also on that auspicious occasion, 
there were different bands of expert musicians playing. 
When the cowherd men saw the pastimes of the cowherd women, they 
became very joyful, and in response they also began to throw yogurt, 
milk, clarified butter and water upon the bodies of the gopés. Then both 
parties began to throw butter on each other’s bodies. Nanda Mahäräja 
was also very happy to see the pastimes of the cowherd men and women, 
and he became very liberal in giving charity to the different singers who 
were assembled there. Some singers were reciting great verses from the 
Upaniñads and Puräëas, some were glorifying the family ancestors, and 
some were singing very sweet songs. There were also many learned 
brähmaëas present, and Nanda Mahäräja, being very satisfied on this 
occasion, gave them different kinds of garments, ornaments and cows in 
charity. 
It is very important to note in this connection how wealthy the 
inhabitants of Våndävana were simply by raising cows. All the cowherd 
men belonged to the vaiçya community, and their business was to protect 
the cows and cultivate crops. By their dress and ornaments, and by their 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
66
behavior, it appears that although they were in a small village, they still 
were rich in material possessions. They possessed such an abundance of 
various kinds of milk products that they were throwing butter lavishly 
on each other’s bodies without restriction. Their wealth was in milk, 
yogurt, clarified butter and many other milk products, and by trading 
their agricultural products, they were rich in various kinds of jewelry, 
ornaments and costly garments. Not only did they possess all these 
things, but they could give them away in charity lavishly, as did Nanda 
Mahäräja. 
Thus Nanda Mahäräja, the foster father of Lord Kåñëa, began to satisfy 
the desires of all the men assembled there. He respectfully received them 
and gave them in charity whatever they desired. The learned brähmaëas, 
who had no other source of income, were completely dependent on the 
vaiçya community for their maintenance, and they received gifts on such 
festive occasions as birthdays and marriages. While Nanda Mahäräja was 
worshiping Lord Viñëu on this occasion and was trying to satisfy all the 
people there, his only desire was that the newborn child Kåñëa be happy. 
Nanda Mahäräja had no knowledge that this child was the origin of 
Viñëu; he was praying to Lord Viñëu to protect Him. 
Rohiëédevé, the mother of Balaräma, was the most fortunate wife of 
Vasudeva. She was away from her husband, yet just to congratulate 
Mahäräja Nanda on the occasion of the birth ceremony of his son, 
Kåñëa, she dressed herself very nicely. Wearing a garland, a necklace and 
other bodily ornaments, she appeared on the scene and moved hither 
and thither. According to the Vedic system, a woman whose husband is 
not at home does not dress herself very nicely. But although Rohiëé’s 
husband was away, she still dressed herself very nicely on this occasion. 
From the opulence of the birth ceremony of Kåñëa, it is very clear that 
at that time Våndävana was rich in every respect. Because Lord Kåñëa 
took birth in the house of King Nanda and mother Yaçodä, the goddess 
of fortune was obliged to manifest her opulences in Våndävana. It 
appeared that Våndävana had already become a site for the pastimes of 
the goddess of fortune. 
After the birth ceremony, Nanda Mahäräja decided to go to Mathurä to 
pay the annual tax to the government of Kaàsa. Before leaving, he 
called for the able cowherd men of the village and asked them to take 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
67
care of Våndävana in his absence. When Nanda Mahäräja arrived in 
Mathurä, Vasudeva got the news and was very eager to congratulate his 
friend. He immediately went to the place where Nanda Mahäräja was 
staying. When Nanda saw Vasudeva, he felt that he had regained his 
life. Nanda, overwhelmed with joy, immediately stood up and embraced 
Vasudeva. Vasudeva was received very warmly and offered a nice place 
to sit. Anxious about his two sons, who had been put under the 
protection of Nanda without Nanda’s knowledge, Vasudeva inquired 
about Them with great anxiety. Both Balaräma and Kåñëa were the sons 
of Vasudeva. Balaräma was transferred to the womb of Rohiëé, 
Vasudeva’s own wife, but Rohiëé was kept under the protection of 
Nanda Mahäräja. Kåñëa was personally delivered to Yaçodä and 
exchanged with her daughter. Nanda Mahäräja knew that Balaräma was 
the son of Vasudeva, although he did not know that Kåñëa was also 
Vasudeva’s son. But Vasudeva was aware of this fact and inquired very 
eagerly about Kåñëa and Balaräma. 
Vasudeva then addressed him, “My dear brother, you were old and very 
anxious to beget a son, and yet you had none. Now by the grace of the 
Lord you are fortunate to have a very nice son. I think that this incident 
is very auspicious for you. Dear friend, I was imprisoned by Kaàsa, and 
now I am released; therefore this is another birth for me. I had no hope 
of seeing you again, but by God’s grace I can see you.” In this way, 
Vasudeva indirectly expressed his anxiety about Kåñëa. Kåñëa was sent 
incognito to the bed of mother Yaçodä, and after very pompously 
celebrating His birth ceremony, Nanda went to Mathurä. So Vasudeva 
was very pleased and said, “This is a new birth for me.” He never 
expected that Kåñëa would live, because all his other sons had been 
killed by Kaàsa. 
Vasudeva continued, “My dear friend, it is very difficult for us to live 
together. Although we have our family and relatives, sons and 
daughters, by nature’s way we are generally separated from one another. 
The reason for this is that every living entity appears on this earth 
under different pressures of fruitive activities; although they assemble 
together, there is no certainty of their remaining together for a long 
time. According to one’s fruitive activities, one has to act differently 
and thereby be separated. For example, many plants and creepers are 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
68
floating on the waves of the ocean. Sometimes they come together, and 
sometimes they separate forever: one plant goes one way, and another 
plant goes another. Similarly, our family assembly may be very nice 
while we are living together, but after some time, in the course of the 
waves of time, we are separated.” 
The purport of this expression by Vasudeva is this: although he had 
eight sons born in the womb of Devaké, unfortunately they were all 
gone. He could not even keep his one son Kåñëa with him. Vasudeva was 
feeling His separation, but he could not express the real fact. “Please tell 
me about the welfare of Våndävana,” he said. “You have many 
animals—are they happy? Are they getting sufficient grass and water? 
Please also let me know whether the place where you are now living is 
undisturbed and peaceful.” This inquiry was made by Vasudeva because 
he was very anxious about Kåñëa’s safety. He knew that Kaàsa and his 
followers were trying to kill Kåñëa by sending various kinds of demons. 
They had already resolved that all children born within ten days of the 
birthday of Kåñëa should be killed. Because Vasudeva was so anxious 
about Kåñëa, he inquired about the safety of His residence. He also 
inquired about Balaräma and His mother, Rohiëé, who were entrusted to 
the care of Nanda Mahäräja. Vasudeva also reminded Nanda Mahäräja 
that Balaräma did not know His real father. “He knows you as His 
father. And now you have another child, Kåñëa, and I think you are 
taking very nice care for both of Them.” It is also significant that 
Vasudeva inquired about the welfare of Nanda Mahäräja’s animals. The 
animals, and especially the cows, were protected exactly in the manner 
of one’s children. Vasudeva was a kñatriya, and Nanda Mahäräja was a 
vaiçya. It is the duty of the kñatriyas to give protection to the citizens, 
and it is the duty of the vaiçyas to give protection to the cows. The cows 
are as important as the citizens. Just as the human citizens should be 
given all kinds of protection, so the cows also should be given full 
protection. 
Vasudeva continued to say that the maintenance of religious principles, 
economic development and the satisfactory execution of meeting the 
demands of the senses depend on cooperation among relatives, nations 
and all humanity. Therefore, it is everyone’s duty to see that his fellow 
citizens and the cows are not put into difficulty. One should see to the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
69
peace and comfort of his fellow man and the animals. The development 
of religious principles, economic development and sense gratification 
can then be achieved without difficulty. Vasudeva expressed his sorrow 
due to not being able to give protection to his own sons born of Devaké. 
He was thinking that religious principles, economic development and 
the satisfaction of his senses were therefore all lost. 
Upon hearing this, Nanda Mahäräja replied, “My dear Vasudeva, I know 
that you are very much aggrieved because the cruel king Kaàsa has 
killed all your sons born of Devaké. Although the last child was a 
daughter, Kaàsa could not kill her, and she has entered into the 
celestial planets. My dear friend, do not be aggrieved; we are all being 
controlled by our past unseen activities. Everyone is subjected to his past 
deeds, and one who is conversant with the philosophy of karma and its 
reactions is a man in knowledge. Such a person will not be aggrieved at 
any incident, happy or miserable.” 
Vasudeva then replied, “My dear Nanda, if you have already paid the 
government taxes, then return soon to your place, because I think that 
there may be some disturbances in Gokula.” 
After the friendly conversation between Nanda Mahäräja and 
Vasudeva, Vasudeva returned to his home. Nanda Mahäräja and the 
other cowherd men, who had come to Mathurä to pay their taxes, also 
returned home. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Fifth Chapter of Kåñëa, “The 
Meeting of Nanda and Vasudeva.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
70
CHAPTER SIX 
Pütanä Killed 
 
While Nanda Mahäräja was returning home, he considered Vasudeva’s 
warning that there might be some disturbance in Gokula. Certainly the 
advice was friendly and not false. So Nanda thought, “There is some 
truth in it.” Therefore, out of fear, he began to take shelter of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is quite natural for a devotee in 
danger to think of Kåñëa, because he has no other shelter. When a child 
is in danger, he takes shelter of his mother or father. Similarly, a devotee 
is always under the shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but 
when he specifically sees some danger, he remembers the Lord very 
rapidly. 
After consulting with his demoniac ministers, Kaàsa instructed a witch 
named Pütanä, who knew the black art of killing small children by 
ghastly sinful methods, to kill all kinds of children in the cities, villages 
and pasturing grounds. Such witches can play their black art only where 
there is no chanting or hearing of the holy name of Kåñëa. It is said that 
wherever the chanting of the holy name of Kåñëa is done, even 
negligently, all bad elements—witches, ghosts and dangerous 
calamities—immediately disappear. And this is certainly true of the 
place where the chanting of the holy name of Kåñëa is done seriously—
especially in Våndävana when the Supreme Lord was personally present. 
Therefore, the doubts of Nanda Mahäräja were certainly based on 
affection for Kåñëa. Actually there was no danger from the activities of 
Pütanä, despite her powers. Such witches are called khecaré, which 
means they can fly in the sky. This black art of witchcraft is still 
practiced by some women in the remote northwestern side of India. 
They can transfer themselves from one place to another on the branch 
of an uprooted tree. Pütanä knew this witchcraft, and therefore she is 
described in the Bhägavatam as khecaré. 
Pütanä entered the county of Gokula, the residential quarter of Nanda 
Mahäräja, without permission. Dressing herself just like a beautiful 
woman, she entered the house of mother Yaçodä. She appeared very 
beautiful, with raised hips, nicely swollen breasts, earrings, and flowers 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
71
in her hair. She looked especially beautiful on account of her thin waist. 
She was glancing at everyone with very attractive looks and smiling 
face, and all the residents of Våndävana were captivated. The innocent 
cowherd women thought that she was the goddess of fortune appearing 
in Våndävana with a lotus flower in her hand. It seemed to them that 
she had personally come to see Kåñëa, who is her husband. Because of 
her exquisite beauty, no one checked her movement, and therefore she 
freely entered the house of Nanda Mahäräja. Pütanä, the killer of many, 
many children, found baby Kåñëa lying on a small bed, and she could at 
once perceive that the baby was hiding His unparalleled potencies, 
which resembled fire covered by ashes. Pütanä thought, “This child is so 
powerful that He can destroy the whole universe immediately.” 
Pütanä’s understanding is very significant. The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Kåñëa, is situated in everyone’s heart. It is stated in the 
Bhagavad-gétä that He gives one necessary intelligence, and He also 
causes one to forget. Pütanä was immediately aware that the child whom 
she was observing in the house of Nanda Mahäräja was the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead Himself. He was lying there as a small baby, but 
that does not mean He was less powerful. The materialistic theory that 
God-worship is anthropomorphic is not correct. No living being can 
become God by undergoing meditation or austerities. God is always God. 
Kåñëa as a baby is as complete as He is as a full-fledged youth. The 
Mäyäväda theory holds that the living entity was formerly God but has 
now become overwhelmed by the influence of mäyä. Therefore they say 
that presently he is not God, but when the influence of mäyä is taken 
away, then he again becomes God. This theory cannot be applied to the 
minute living entities. The living entities are minute parts and parcels of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; they are minute particles or sparks 
of the original fire. So these sparks can be covered by the influence of 
mäyä, but the original fire, Kåñëa, cannot. Kåñëa is the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, even from the beginning of His appearance in 
the house of Vasudeva and Devaké. 
Kåñëa showed the nature of a small baby and closed His eyes, as if to 
avoid the face of Pütanä. This closing of the eyes is interpreted and 
studied in different ways by the devotees. Some say that Kåñëa closed 
His eyes because He did not like to see the face of Pütanä, who had 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
72
killed so many children and who had now come to kill Him. Others say 
that Pütanä hesitated to take the baby on her lap because something 
extraordinary was being dictated to her from within, and in order to give 
her assurance, Kåñëa closed His eyes so that she would not be frightened. 
And yet others interpret in this way: Kåñëa appeared in order to kill the 
demons and give protection to the devotees, as stated in the Bhagavad-
gétä: pariträëäya sädhünäà vinäçäya ca duñkåtäm [Bg. 4.8]. The first 
demon to be killed was a woman. According to Vedic rules, the killing of 
a woman, a brähmaëa, cows or a child is strictly forbidden. Kåñëa was 
obliged to kill the demon Pütanä, and because the killing of a woman is 
forbidden according to Vedic çästra, He could not help but close His 
eyes. Another interpretation is that Kåñëa closed His eyes because He 
simply took Pütanä to be His nurse. Pütanä came to Kåñëa just to offer 
her breast for the Lord to suck. Kåñëa is so merciful that even though He 
knew Pütanä was there to kill Him, He took her as His nurse or mother. 
There are seven kinds of mothers according to Vedic injunction: the 
real mother, the wife of a teacher or spiritual master, the wife of a king, 
the wife of a brähmaëa, the cow, the nurse and mother earth. Because 
Pütanä came to take Kåñëa on her lap and offer her breast milk to be 
sucked by Him, she was accepted by Kåñëa as one of His mothers. That is 
considered to be another reason He closed His eyes: He had to kill a 
nurse or mother. But His killing of His mother or nurse was no different 
from His love for His real mother or foster mother Yaçodä. We further 
understand from Vedic information that Pütanä was also treated as a 
mother and given the same facility as Yaçodä. As Yaçodä was given 
liberation from the material world, Pütanä was also given liberation. 
When the baby Kåñëa closed His eyes, Pütanä took Him on her lap. She 
did not know that she was holding death personified. If a person 
mistakes a snake for a rope, he dies. Similarly, Pütanä had killed so many 
babies before meeting Kåñëa, and she mistook Him to be like them, but 
now she was accepting the snake that would kill her immediately. 
When Pütanä was taking baby Kåñëa on her lap, both Yaçodä and 
Rohiëé were present, but they did not forbid her because she was so 
beautifully dressed, and because she showed motherly affection towards 
Kåñëa. They could not understand that she was a sword within a 
decorated case. Pütanä had smeared a very powerful poison on her 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
73
breasts, and immediately after taking the baby on her lap, she pushed 
her breastly nipple within His mouth. She was hoping that as soon as He 
would suck her breast, He would die. But baby Kåñëa very quickly took 
the nipple in anger. He sucked the milk-poison along with the life air of 
the demon. In other words, Kåñëa simultaneously sucked the milk from 
her breast and killed her by sucking out her life. Kåñëa is so merciful 
that because the demon Pütanä came to offer her breast milk to Him, He 
fulfilled her desire and accepted her activity as motherly. But to stop her 
from further nefarious activities, He immediately killed her. And 
because the demon was killed by Kåñëa, she got liberation. As Kåñëa 
pressed her breast extremely hard and sucked out her very breath, 
Pütanä fell down on the ground, spread her arms and legs and began to 
cry, “Oh, child, leave me, leave me!” She was crying loudly and 
perspiring, and her whole body became wet. 
As she died screaming, there was a tremendous vibration on the earth 
and in the sky, on the upper and lower planets and in all directions, and 
people thought that thunderbolts were falling. Thus the nightmare of 
the Pütanä witch was over, and she assumed her real feature as a great 
demon. She opened her fierce mouth and spread her arms and legs all 
over. She fell exactly as Våträsura did when struck by the thunderbolt of 
Indra. The long hair on her head was scattered all over her body. Her 
fallen body extended up to twelve miles and smashed all the trees to 
pieces, and everyone was struck with wonder upon seeing this gigantic 
body. Her teeth appeared just like plows, and her nostrils appeared just 
like mountain caves. Her breasts appeared like small hills, and her hair 
was a vast reddish bush. Her eye sockets appeared like blind wells, and 
her two thighs appeared like two banks of a river. Her two hands 
appeared like two strongly constructed bridges, and her abdomen seemed 
like a dried-up lake. All the cowherd men and women became struck 
with awe and wonder upon seeing this. And the tumultuous sound of her 
falling shocked their brains and ears and made their hearts beat strongly. 
When the gopés saw little Kåñëa fearlessly playing on Pütanä’s lap, they 
very quickly came and picked Him up. Mother Yaçodä, Rohiëé and other 
elder gopés immediately performed the auspicious rituals by taking the 
tail of a cow and circumambulating His body. The child was completely 
washed with the urine of a cow, and the dust created by the hooves of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
74
the cows was thrown all over His body. This was all just to save little 
Kåñëa from future inauspicious accidents. This incident gives us a clear 
indication of how important the cow is to the family, society and to 
living beings in general. The transcendental body of Kåñëa did not 
require any protection, but to instruct us on the importance of the cow, 
the Lord was smeared over with cow dung, washed with the urine of a 
cow, and sprinkled with the dust upraised by the walking of the cows. 
After this purificatory process, the gopés, headed by mother Yaçodä and 
Rohiëé, chanted twelve names of Viñëu to give Kåñëa’s body full 
protection from all evil influences. They washed their hands and feet 
and sipped water three times, as is the custom before chanting mantra. 
They chanted as follows: “My dear Kåñëa, may the Lord who is known as 
Aja protect Your legs; may Lord Maëimän protect Your knees; may Lord 
Yajïa protect Your thighs; may Lord Acyuta protect Your upper waist; 
may Lord Hayagréva protect Your abdomen; may Lord Keçava protect 
Your heart; may Lord Éça protect Your chest; may Lord Sürya protect 
Your neck; may Lord Viñëu protect Your arms; may Lord Urukrama 
protect Your face; may Lord Éçvara protect Your head; may Lord 
Cakradhara protect Your front; may Lord Gadädhara protect Your back; 
may Lord Madhusüdana, who carries a bow in His hand, protect Your 
right side; may Lord Ajana protect Your left side; may Lord Urugäya 
with His conchshell protect You on all sides; may the Personality of 
Godhead Upendra protect You from above; may Lord Tärkñya protect 
You on the ground; may Lord Haladhara protect You from all sides; may 
the Personality of Godhead known as Håñékeça protect all Your senses; 
may Lord Näräyaëa protect Your life airs; may the Lord of Çvetadvépa, 
Näräyaëa, protect the core of Your heart; may Lord Yogeçvara protect 
Your mind; may Lord Påçnigarbha protect Your intelligence; and may 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead protect Your soul. While You are 
playing, may Lord Govinda protect You from all sides, and when You are 
sleeping, may Lord Mädhava protect You from all danger; when You are 
walking, may the Lord of Vaikuëöha protect You from falling down; 
when You are sitting, may Lord Näräyaëa give You all protection; and 
while You are eating, may the Lord of all sacrifices give You all 
protection.” 
Thus mother Yaçodä chanted different names of Viñëu to protect child 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
75
Kåñëa’s different bodily parts. Mother Yaçodä was firmly convinced that 
she should protect her child from different kinds of evil spirits and 
ghosts—namely Òäkinés, Yätudhänés, Kuñmäëòas, Yakñas, Räkñasas, 
Vinäyakas, Koöaräs, Revatés, Jyeñöhäs, Pütanäs, Mätåkäs, Unmädas and 
similar other evil spirits, who cause persons to forget their own existence 
and give trouble to the life airs and the senses. Sometimes they appear in 
dreams and cause much perturbation; sometimes they appear as old 
women and suck the blood of small children. But no such ghosts and evil 
spirits can remain where there is chanting of the holy name of God. 
Mother Yaçodä was firmly convinced of the Vedic injunctions about the 
importance of cows and the holy name of Viñëu; therefore she took all 
shelter in the cows and the name of Viñëu just to protect her child 
Kåñëa. She recited all the holy names of Viñëu so that He might save the 
child. Vedic culture has taken advantage of keeping cows and chanting 
the holy name of Viñëu since the beginning of history, and persons who 
are still following the Vedic ways, especially the householders, keep at 
least one dozen cows and worship the Deity of Lord Viñëu, who is 
installed in their house. Persons who are advancing in Kåñëa 
consciousness should take instruction from this pastime and also be very 
much interested in cows and the holy name of Viñëu. 
The elder gopés of Våndävana were so absorbed in affection for Kåñëa 
that they wanted to save Him, although there was no need to, for He 
had already protected Himself. They could not understand that Kåñëa 
was the Supreme Personality of Godhead playing as a child. After 
performing the formalities to protect the child, mother Yaçodä took 
Kåñëa and let Him suck her breast. When the child was protected by 
viñëu-mantra, mother Yaçodä felt that He was safe. In the meantime, all 
the cowherd men who had gone to Mathurä to pay tax returned home 
and were struck with wonder at seeing the gigantic dead body of Pütanä. 
Nanda Mahäräja recalled the prophecy of Vasudeva and considered him 
a great sage and mystic yogé; otherwise, how could he have foretold an 
incident that happened during his absence from Våndävana? After this, 
all the residents of Vraja cut the gigantic body of Pütanä into pieces and 
piled it up with wood for burning. When all the limbs of Pütanä’s body 
were burning, the smoke emanating from the fire created a good aroma 
of aguru. This aroma was due to her being killed by Kåñëa. This means 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
76
that the demon Pütanä was washed of all her sinful activities and 
attained a celestial body. Here is an example of how the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead is all-good: Pütanä came to kill Kåñëa, but 
because He sucked her milk, she was immediately purified, and her dead 
body attained a transcendental quality. Her only business was to kill 
small children; she was only fond of blood. But in spite of being envious 
of Kåñëa, she attained salvation because she gave her milk to Him to 
drink. So what can be said of those who are affectionate to Kåñëa in the 
relationship of mother, who with great love and affection render service 
to Him, the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the Supersoul of every 
living entity? 
It is concluded therefore that even a little energy expended in the 
service of the Lord gives one immense transcendental profit. This is 
explained in the Bhagavad-gétä: sv-alpam apy asya dharmasya träyate 
mahato bhayät. Devotional service in Kåñëa consciousness is so sublime 
that even a little service to Kåñëa, knowingly or unknowingly, gives one 
the greatest transcendental benefit. The system of worshiping Kåñëa by 
offering flowers from a tree is also beneficial for the living entity who is 
confined to the bodily existence of that tree. When flowers and fruits 
are offered to Kåñëa, the tree that bore them also receives much benefit, 
indirectly. The arcana process, or worshiping procedure, is therefore 
beneficial for everyone. Kåñëa is worshipable by great demigods like 
Brahmä and Lord Çiva, and Pütanä was so fortunate that the same Kåñëa 
played in her lap as a little child. The lotus feet of Kåñëa, which are 
worshiped by great sages and devotees, were placed on the body of 
Pütanä. People worship Kåñëa and offer food with great reverence and 
devotion, but automatically He sucked the milk from the body of 
Pütanä. Devotees therefore pray that if simply by offering something as 
an enemy Pütanä got so much benefit, then who can measure the 
benefit of worshiping Kåñëa in love and affection? Therefore only Kåñëa 
should be worshiped, for so much benefit awaits the worshiper. 
Although Pütanä was an evil spirit, she gained elevation just like the 
mother of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is clear that the cows 
and the elder gopés who offered milk to Kåñëa were also elevated to the 
transcendental position. Kåñëa can offer anyone anything, from 
liberation to anything materially conceivable. Therefore, there cannot 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
77
be any doubt of the salvation of Pütanä, whose bodily milk was sucked by 
Kåñëa for such a long time. And how can there be any doubt about the 
salvation of the gopés who were so fond of Kåñëa? Undoubtedly all the 
gopés, cowherd boys, cows and everyone else who served Kåñëa in 
Våndävana with love and affection were liberated from the miserable 
condition of material existence. 
When all the inhabitants of Våndävana smelled the good aroma from 
the smoke of the burning Pütanä, they inquired from each other, 
“Where is this good fragrance coming from?” And while conversing, 
they came to understand that it was the fumes of the burning Pütanä. 
They were very fond of Kåñëa, and as soon as they heard that the demon 
Pütanä had been killed by Kåñëa, they offered blessings to the little child 
out of affection. After the burning of Pütanä, Nanda Mahäräja came 
home and immediately took up the child on his lap and began to smell 
His head. In this way, he was quite satisfied that his little child was saved 
from this great calamity. Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé has given a blessing to 
all persons who hear the narration of the killing of Pütanä by Kåñëa: 
they will surely attain the favor of Govinda. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Sixth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Pütanä Killed.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
78
CHAPTER SEVEN 
The Salvation of Tåëävarta 
 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Kåñëa, is always full with six 
opulences—namely complete wealth, complete strength, complete fame, 
complete knowledge, complete beauty and complete renunciation. The 
Lord appears in different complete, eternal forms of incarnation. The 
conditioned soul has immense opportunity to hear about the 
transcendental activities of the Lord in these different incarnations. In 
the Bhagavad-gétä it is said, janma karma ca me divyam [Bg. 4.9]. The 
pastimes and activities of the Lord are not material—they are beyond 
the material conception—and the conditioned soul can benefit by 
hearing such uncommon activities. Hearing is an opportunity to 
associate with the Lord; to hear His activities is to evolve to the 
transcendental nature—simply by hearing. The conditioned soul has a 
natural aptitude to hear something about other conditioned souls in the 
form of fiction, drama and novel. That inclination to hear something 
about others may be utilized in hearing the pastimes of the Lord. Then 
one can immediately evolve to his transcendental nature. Kåñëa’s 
pastimes are not only beautiful; they are also very pleasing to the mind. 
If someone takes advantage of hearing the pastimes of the Lord, the 
material contamination of dust, accumulated in the heart due to long 
association with material nature, can be immediately cleansed. Lord 
Caitanya also instructed that simply by hearing the transcendental 
name of Lord Kåñëa one can cleanse the heart of all material 
contamination. There are different processes for self-realization, but this 
process of devotional service—of which hearing is the most important 
function—when adopted by any conditioned soul, will automatically 
cleanse him of the material contamination and enable him to realize his 
real constitutional position. Conditional life is due to this 
contamination only, and as soon as it is cleared off, then naturally the 
dormant function of the living entity—rendering service to the Lord—
awakens. By developing his eternal relationship with the Supreme Lord, 
one becomes eligible to create friendship with the devotees. Mahäräja 
Parékñit recommended, from practical experience, that everyone try to 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
79
hear about the transcendental pastimes of the Lord. This Kåñëa treatise 
is meant for that purpose, and the reader may take advantage of it to 
attain the ultimate goal of human life. 
The Lord, out of His causeless mercy, descends to this material world 
and displays His activities just like an ordinary man. Unfortunately the 
impersonalists or the atheistic class of men consider Kåñëa to be an 
ordinary man like themselves, and so they deride Him. This is 
condemned in the Bhagavad-gétä by the Lord Himself when He says, 
avajänanti mäà müòhäù. The müòhas, or rascals, take Kåñëa to be an 
ordinary man or a slightly more powerful man; out of their great 
misfortune, they cannot accept Him as the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. Sometimes such unfortunate persons misrepresent themselves 
as incarnations of Kåñëa without referring to the authorized scriptures. 
When Kåñëa grew up a little more, He began to turn Himself backside 
up; He did not merely lie down on His back. And another function was 
observed by Yaçodä and Nanda Mahäräja: Kåñëa’s first birthday. They 
arranged for Kåñëa’s birthday ceremony, which is still observed by all 
followers of the Vedic principles. (Kåñëa’s birthday ceremony is observed 
in India by all Hindus, irrespective of different sectarian views.) All the 
cowherd men and women were invited to participate in the jubilant 
celebration. A nice band played, and the people assembled enjoyed it. 
All the learned brähmaëas were invited, and they chanted Vedic hymns 
for the good fortune of Kåñëa. During the chanting of the Vedic hymns 
and playing of the bands, Kåñëa was bathed by mother Yaçodä. This 
bathing ceremony is technically called abhiñeka, and even today this is 
observed in all the temples of Våndävana on Janmäñöamé Day, or the 
birthday anniversary of Lord Kåñëa. 
On this occasion, mother Yaçodä arranged to distribute a large quantity 
of grains, and first-class cows decorated with golden ornaments were 
made ready to be given in charity to the learned, respectable brähmaëas. 
Yaçodä took her bath and dressed herself nicely, and taking child Kåñëa, 
duly dressed and bathed, on her lap, she sat down to hear the Vedic 
hymns chanted by the brähmaëas. While listening to the chanting of the 
Vedic hymns, the child appeared to be falling asleep, and therefore 
mother Yaçodä very silently laid Him down on the bed. Being engaged in 
receiving all the friends, relatives and residents of Våndävana on that 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
80
holy occasion, she forgot to feed the child milk. He was crying, being 
hungry, but mother Yaçodä could not hear Him cry because of the 
various noises. The child, however, became angry because He was 
hungry and His mother was not paying attention to Him. So He lifted 
His legs and began to kick His lotus feet just like an ordinary child. Baby 
Kåñëa had been placed underneath a hand-driven cart, and while He 
was kicking His legs, He accidentally touched the wheel of the cart, and 
it collapsed. Various kinds of utensils and dishes made of brass and other 
metals had been piled up in the handcart, and they all fell down with a 
great noise. The wheel of the cart separated from the axle, and the 
spokes of the wheel were all broken and scattered hither and thither. 
Mother Yaçodä and all the gopés, as well as Mahäräja Nanda and the 
cowherd men, were astonished as to how the cart could have collapsed 
by itself. All the men and women who were assembled for the holy 
function crowded around and began to suggest how the cart might have 
collapsed. No one could ascertain the cause, but some small children 
who were entrusted to play with baby Kåñëa informed the crowd that it 
was due to Kåñëa’s striking His feet against the wheel. They assured the 
crowd that they had seen how it happened with their own eyes, and they 
strongly asserted the point. Some were listening to the statement of the 
small children, but others said, “How can you believe the statements of 
these children?” The cowherd men and women could not understand 
that the all-powerful Personality of Godhead was lying there as a baby 
and that He could do anything. Both the possible and impossible were in 
His power. While the discussion was going on, baby Kåñëa cried. 
Without remonstration, mother Yaçodä picked the child up on her lap 
and called the learned brähmaëas to chant holy Vedic hymns to 
counteract the evil spirits. At the same time she allowed the baby to 
suck her breast. If a child sucks the mother’s breast nicely, it is to be 
understood that he is out of all danger. After this, all the stronger 
cowherd men put the broken cart in order, and all the scattered things 
were set up nicely as before. The brähmaëas thereafter began to offer 
oblations to the sacrificial fire with yogurt, butter, kuça grass and water. 
They worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead for the good 
fortune of the child. 
The brähmaëas who were present at that time were all qualified because 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
81
they were not envious, they never indulged in untruthfulness, they were 
never proud, they were nonviolent, and they never claimed any false 
prestige. They were all bona fide brähmaëas, and there was no reason to 
think that their blessings would be useless. With firm faith in the 
qualified brähmaëas, Nanda Mahäräja took his child on his lap and 
bathed Him with water mixed with various herbs while the brähmaëas 
chanted hymns from the Åg, Yajur and Säma Vedas. 
It is said that without being a qualified brähmaëa one should not read 
the mantras of the Vedas. Here is the proof that the brähmaëas were 
qualified with all the brahminical symptoms. Mahäräja Nanda also had 
full faith in them. Therefore they were allowed to perform the ritualistic 
ceremonies by chanting the Vedic mantras. There are many different 
varieties of sacrifices recommended for different purposes, but the 
mantras are all to be chanted by qualified brähmaëas. And because in 
this Age of Kali such qualified brähmaëas are not available, all Vedic 
ritualistic sacrifices are forbidden. Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu has 
therefore recommended only one kind of sacrifice in this age—namely 
saìkértana-yajïa, or simply chanting the mahä-mantra, Hare Kåñëa, 
Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare / Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma 
Räma, Hare Hare. 
As the brähmaëas chanted the Vedic hymns and performed the 
ritualistic ceremonies for the second time, Nanda Mahäräja again gave 
huge quantities of grains and many cows to them. All the cows which 
were given in charity were covered with nice gold-embroidered 
garments, and their horns were bedecked with golden rings; their hooves 
were covered with silver plate, and they wore garlands of flowers. He 
gave so many cows just for the welfare of his wonderful child, and the 
brähmaëas in return bestowed their heartfelt blessings. And the 
blessings offered by the able brähmaëas were never to be baffled. 
One day, shortly after the ceremony, when mother Yaçodä was patting 
her baby on her lap, the baby felt too heavy, and being unable to carry 
Him, she unwillingly placed Him on the ground. After a while, she 
became engaged in household affairs. At that time, a servant of Kaàsa’s 
known as Tåëävarta, as instructed by Kaàsa, appeared there in the 
shape of a whirlwind. He picked the child up on his shoulders and raised 
a great dust storm all over Våndävana, covering everyone’s eyes. Within 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
82
a few moments the whole area of Våndävana became so densely dark 
that no one could see himself or anyone else. During this great 
catastrophe, mother Yaçodä could not see her baby, who was taken away 
by the whirlwind, and she began to cry very piteously. She fell down on 
the ground exactly like a cow who has just lost her calf. When mother 
Yaçodä was so piteously crying, all the cowherd women immediately 
came and began to look for the baby, but they were disappointed and 
could not find Him. 
The Tåëävarta demon went high into the sky with baby Kåñëa on his 
shoulder, but the baby assumed such a weight that suddenly he could not 
go any further, and he had to stop his whirlwind activities. Baby Kåñëa 
made Himself heavy and began to weigh down the demon, catching hold 
of his neck. Tåëävarta felt the baby to be as heavy as a big mountain, 
and he tried to get out of His clutches, but he was unable to do so, and 
his eyes popped out from their sockets. Crying very fiercely, he fell down 
to the ground of Våndävana and died. The demon fell exactly like 
Tripuräsura, who was pierced by the arrow of Lord Çiva. Tåëävarta hit a 
stone slab, and his limbs were smashed. His body became visible to all 
the inhabitants of Våndävana. 
When the gopés saw the demon killed and child Kåñëa very happily 
playing on his body, they immediately picked Kåñëa up with great 
affection. The cowherd men and women became very happy to get back 
their beloved child Kåñëa. At that time they began to talk about how 
wonderful it was that the demon had taken away the child to devour 
Him but could not do so; instead he fell down dead. Some of them 
supported the situation: “This is proper because those who are too sinful 
die from their sinful reactions, and child Kåñëa is pious; therefore He is 
saved from all kinds of fearful situations. And we too must have 
performed great sacrifices in our previous lives, worshiping the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, giving great wealth in charity and acting 
philanthropically for the general welfare of men. Because of such pious 
activities, the child is saved from all danger.” 
The gopés assembled there spoke among themselves: “What sort of 
austerities and penances we must have undergone in our previous lives! 
We must have worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, offered 
different kinds of sacrifices, made charities and performed many welfare 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
83
activities for the public, such as growing banyan trees and excavating 
wells. As a result of these pious activities, we have gotten back our child, 
even though He was supposed to be dead. Now He has come back to 
enliven His relatives.” After observing such wonderful happenings, 
Nanda Mahäräja began to think of the words of Vasudeva again and 
again. 
After this incident, when Yaçodä once was nursing her child and patting 
Him with great affection, there streamed a profuse supply of milk from 
her breast, and when she opened the mouth of the child with her 
fingers, she suddenly saw the universal manifestation within His mouth. 
She saw within the mouth of Kåñëa the whole sky, including the 
luminaries, stars in all directions, the sun, moon, fire, air, seas, islands, 
mountains, rivers, forests and all other movable and immovable entities. 
When mother Yaçodä saw this, her heart began to throb, and she 
murmured within herself, “How wonderful this is!” She could not 
express anything, but simply closed her eyes. She was absorbed in 
wonderful thoughts. Kåñëa’s showing the universal form of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, even when lying down on the lap of His 
mother, proves that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, whether He is manifested as a child on 
the lap of His mother or as a charioteer on the Battlefield of Kurukñetra. 
The concoction of the impersonalist, that one can become God by 
meditation or by some artificial material activities, is herewith declared 
false. God is always God in any condition or status, and the living 
entities are always the parts and parcels of the Supreme Lord. They can 
never be equal to the inconceivable, supernatural power of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Seventh Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“The Salvation of Tåëävarta.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
84
CHAPTER EIGHT 
Vision of the Universal Form 
 
After this incident, Vasudeva asked his family priest, Garga Muni, to 
visit the place of Nanda Mahäräja in order to astrologically calculate the 
future life of Kåñëa. Garga Muni was a great saintly sage who had 
undergone many austerities and penances and been appointed priest of 
the Yadu dynasty. When Garga Muni arrived at the home of Nanda 
Mahäräja, Nanda Mahäräja was very pleased to see him and immediately 
stood up with folded hands and offered his respectful obeisances. He 
received Garga Muni with the feeling of one who is worshiping the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He offered him a nice sitting place, 
and when he sat down, Nanda Mahäräja offered him a warm reception. 
Addressing him very politely, he said, “My dear brähmaëa, your 
appearance in a householder’s place is only to enlighten. We are always 
engaged in household duties and are forgetting our real duty of self-
realization. Your coming to our house is to give us some enlightenment 
about spiritual life. You have no other purpose to visit householders.” 
Actually a saintly person or a brähmaëa has no business visiting 
householders, who are always busy in the matter of dollars and cents. 
The only reason saintly persons and brähmaëas go to the place of a 
householder is to enlighten him. If it is asked, “Why don’t the 
householders go to a saintly person or a brähmaëa for enlightenment?” 
the answer is that householders are very poor-hearted. Generally 
householders think that their engagement in family affairs is their prime 
duty and that self-realization or enlightenment in spiritual knowledge is 
secondary. Out of compassion only, saintly persons and brähmaëas go to 
householders’ homes. 
Nanda Mahäräja addressed Garga Muni as one of the great authorities in 
astrological science. The foretellings of astrological science, such as the 
occurrence of solar or lunar eclipses, are wonderful calculations, and by 
this particular science a person can understand the future very clearly. 
Garga Muni was proficient in this knowledge. By this knowledge one 
can understand what his previous activities were that are causing him to 
enjoy or suffer in this life. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
85
Nanda Mahäräja also addressed Garga Muni as “the best of the 
brähmaëas.” A brähmaëa is one who is expert in the knowledge of the 
Supreme. Without knowledge of the Supreme Absolute, one cannot be 
recognized as a brähmaëa. The exact word used in this connection is 
brahma-vidäm, which means those who know the Supreme very well. An 
expert brähmaëa is able to give reformatory facilities to the subcastes—
namely the kñatriyas and vaiçyas. The çüdras observe no reformatory 
performances. The brähmaëa is considered to be the spiritual master or 
priest for the kñatriya and vaiçya. Nanda Mahäräja happened to be a 
vaiçya, and he accepted Garga Muni as a first-class brähmaëa. He 
therefore offered his two foster sons—namely Kåñëa and Balaräma—to 
him to purify. He agreed that not only these boys but all human beings 
just after birth should accept a qualified brähmaëa as spiritual master. 
Upon this request, Garga Muni replied, “Vasudeva has sent me to see to 
the reformatory performances of these boys, especially Kåñëa’s, but if I 
do so it may incidentally appear that Kåñëa is the son of Devaké, since I 
am Vasudeva’s family priest.” By his astrological calculation, Garga Muni 
could understand that Kåñëa was the son of Devaké but that He was 
being kept under the care of Nanda Mahäräja, which Nanda did not 
know. Indirectly he said that Kåñëa and Balaräma were both sons of 
Vasudeva. Balaräma was known as the son of Vasudeva because His 
mother, Rohiëé, was present there, but Nanda Mahäräja did not know 
about Kåñëa. Garga Muni indirectly disclosed the fact that Kåñëa was 
the son of Devaké. Garga Muni also warned Nanda Mahäräja that if he 
would perform the reformatory ceremony, then Kaàsa, who was 
naturally very sinful, would understand that Kåñëa was the son of 
Devaké and Vasudeva. According to astrological calculation, Devaké 
could not have a female child, although everyone thought that the 
eighth child of Devaké was female. In this way Garga Muni intimated to 
Nanda Mahäräja that the female child was born of Yaçodä and that 
Kåñëa was born of Devaké and they were exchanged. The female child, 
or Durgä, also informed Kaàsa that the child who would kill him was 
already born somewhere else. Garga Muni stated, “If I give your child a 
name and if He fulfills the prophecy of the female child to Kaàsa, then 
it may be that the sinful demon will come and kill this child also after 
the name-giving ceremony. But I do not want to become responsible for 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
86
all these future calamities.” 
On hearing the words of Garga Muni, Nanda Mahäräja said, “If there is 
such danger, then it is better not to plan any gorgeous name-giving 
ceremony. It would be better for you to simply chant the Vedic hymns 
and perform the purificatory process. We belong to the twice-born caste, 
and I am taking this opportunity of your presence. So please perform the 
name-giving ceremony without external pomp.” Nanda Mahäräja 
wanted to keep the name-giving ceremony a secret and yet take 
advantage of Garga Muni’s performing the ceremony. 
When Garga Muni was so eagerly requested by Nanda Mahäräja, he 
performed the name-giving ceremony as secretly as possible in the 
cowshed of Nanda Mahäräja. He informed Nanda Mahäräja that the son 
of Rohiëé would be very pleasing to His family members and relatives 
and therefore would be called Räma. In the future He would be 
extraordinarily strong and therefore would be called Balaräma. Garga 
Muni said further, “Because your family and the family of the Yadus are 
so intimately connected and attracted, His name will also be 
Saìkarñaëa.” This means that Garga Muni awarded three names to the 
son of Rohiëé—namely Balaräma, Saìkarñaëa and Baladeva. But he 
carefully did not disclose the fact that Balaräma also appeared in the 
womb of Devaké and was subsequently transferred to the womb of 
Rohiëé. Kåñëa and Balaräma are real brothers, being originally sons of 
Devaké. 
Garga Muni then informed Nanda Mahäräja, “As far as your son is 
concerned, this child has taken different bodily complexions in different 
yugas [millennia]. First of all He assumed the color white, then the color 
red, and then the color yellow, and now He has assumed the color black. 
Besides that, He was formerly the son of Vasudeva; therefore His name 
should be Väsudeva as well as Kåñëa. Some people will call Him Kåñëa, 
and some will call Him Väsudeva. But one thing you must know: this son 
has had many, many other names and activities due to His different 
pastimes.” 
Garga Muni further hinted to Nanda Mahäräja that his son would also 
be called Giridhäré because of His uncommon pastime of lifting 
Govardhana Hill. Since Garga Muni was an astrologer, he could 
understand everything past and future, and thus he said, “I know 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
87
everything about His activities and names, but others do not know. This 
child will be very pleasing to all the cowherd men and cows. Being very 
popular in Våndävana, He will be the cause of all good fortune for you. 
Because of His presence, you will overcome all kinds of material 
calamities, despite opposing elements.” 
Garga Muni continued to say, “My dear King of Vraja, in His previous 
births this child many times protected righteous persons from the hands 
of rogues and thieves whenever there was political disruption. Your 
child is so powerful that anyone who will become a devotee of your boy 
will never be troubled by enemies. Just as demigods are always protected 
by Lord Viñëu, the devotees of your child will always be protected by 
Näräyaëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This child will grow in 
power, beauty, opulence—in everything—on the level of Näräyaëa, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore I would advise that you 
protect Him very carefully so that He may grow without disturbance.” In 
other words, Garga Muni informed Nanda Mahäräja that because he was 
a great devotee of Näräyaëa, Lord Näräyaëa had given Nanda a son 
equal to Him. At the same time, Garga Muni indicated that this son 
would be disturbed by so many demons and that Nanda should therefore 
be careful and protect Him. In this way, Garga Muni convinced Nanda 
Mahäräja that Näräyaëa Himself had become his son. In various ways he 
described the transcendental qualities of his son. After giving this 
information, Garga Muni returned to his home. Nanda Mahäräja began 
to think of himself as the most fortunate person, and he was very 
satisfied to receive such a benediction in this way. 
A short time after this incident, both Balaräma and Kåñëa began to 
crawl on Their hands and knees. When They were crawling like that, 
They pleased Their mothers. The bells tied to Their waist and ankles 
sounded fascinating, and They would move around very pleasingly. 
Sometimes, just like ordinary children, They would be frightened by 
others and would immediately hurry to Their mothers for protection. 
Sometimes They would fall into the clay and mud of Våndävana and 
would approach Their mothers smeared with clay and saffron. They 
were actually smeared with saffron and sandalwood pulp by Their 
mothers, but due to crawling over muddy clay, They would 
simultaneously smear Their bodies with clay. As soon as They would 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
88
come crawling to Their mothers, Yaçodä and Rohiëé would take Them 
on their laps and, covering Them with the lower portion of their saris, 
allow Them to suck their breasts. When the babies were sucking their 
breasts, the mothers would see small teeth coming in. Thus their joy 
would be intensified to see their children grow. Sometimes the naughty 
babies would crawl up to the cowshed, catch the tail of a calf and stand 
up. The calves, being disturbed, would immediately begin running here 
and there, and the children would be dragged over clay and cow dung. 
To see this fun, Yaçodä and Rohiëé would call all their neighboring 
friends, the gopés. Upon seeing these childhood pastimes of Lord Kåñëa, 
the gopés would be merged in transcendental bliss. In their enjoyment 
they would laugh very loudly. 
Both Kåñëa and Balaräma were so restless that Their mothers Yaçodä 
and Rohiëé would try to protect Them from cows, bulls, monkeys, water, 
fire and birds while they were executing their household duties. Always 
being anxious to protect the children and to execute their duties, they 
were not very tranquil. In a very short time, both Kåñëa and Balaräma 
began to stand up and slightly move on Their legs. When Kåñëa and 
Balaräma began to walk, other friends of the same age joined Them, and 
together They began to give the highest transcendental pleasure to the 
gopés, specifically to mother Yaçodä and Rohiëé. 
All the gopé friends of Yaçodä and Rohiëé enjoyed the naughty childish 
activities of Kåñëa and Balaräma in Våndävana. In order to enjoy 
further transcendental bliss, they all assembled and went to mother 
Yaçodä to lodge complaints against the restless boys. When Kåñëa was 
sitting before mother Yaçodä, all the elder gopés began to lodge 
complaints against Him so that Kåñëa could hear. They said, “Dear 
Yaçodä, why don’t you restrict your naughty Kåñëa? He comes to our 
houses along with Balaräma every morning and evening, and before the 
milking of the cows They let loose the calves, and the calves drink all 
the milk of the cows. So when we go to milk the cows, we find no milk, 
and we have to return with empty pots. If we warn Kåñëa and Balaräma 
about doing this, They simply smile so charmingly that we cannot do 
anything. Also, your Kåñëa and Balaräma find great pleasure in stealing 
our stock of yogurt and butter from wherever we keep it. When Kåñëa 
and Balaräma are caught stealing the yogurt and butter, They say, “Why 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
89
do you charge Us with stealing? Do you think that butter and yogurt are 
in scarcity in Our house?’ Sometimes They steal butter, yogurt and milk 
and distribute them to the monkeys. When the monkeys are well fed and 
do not take any more, then your boys chide, “This milk and butter and 
yogurt are useless—even the monkeys won’t take it.’ And They break 
the pots and throw them hither and thither. If we keep our stock of 
yogurt, butter and milk in a solitary dark place, your Kåñëa and Balaräma 
find it in the darkness by the glaring effulgence of the ornaments and 
jewels on Their bodies. If by chance They cannot find the hidden butter 
and yogurt, They go to our little babies and pinch their bodies so that 
they cry, and then They go away. If out of fear of these naughty boys we 
keep our stock of butter and yogurt high on the ceiling, hanging on a 
swing, although it is beyond Their reach They arrange to reach it by 
piling all kinds of wooden planks over the grinding machine. And if 
They cannot reach, They make a hole in the pot. We think therefore 
that you’d better take all the jeweled ornaments from the bodies of your 
children.” 
On hearing this, Yaçodä would say, “All right, I will take all the jewels 
from Kåñëa so that He cannot see the butter hidden in the darkness.” 
Then the gopés would say, “No, no, don’t do this. What good will you do 
by taking away the jewels? We do not know what kind of boys these are, 
but even without ornaments They spread some kind of effulgence so 
that even in darkness They can see everything.” Then mother Yaçodä 
would inform them, “All right, keep your butter and yogurt carefully so 
that They may not reach it.” In reply to this, the gopés said, “Yes, actually 
we do so, but because we are sometimes engaged in our household duties, 
these naughty boys enter our house somehow or other and spoil 
everything. Sometimes, being unable to steal our butter and yogurt, out 
of anger They pass urine on the clean floor and sometimes spit on it. 
Now just see how your boy is hearing these complaints. All day He 
simply makes arrangements to steal our butter and yogurt, and now He is 
sitting just like a very silent good boy. Just see His face.” When mother 
Yaçodä thought to chastise her boy after hearing all the complaints, she 
saw His pitiable face, and smiling, she did not chastise Him. 
Another day, when Kåñëa and Balaräma were playing with Their 
friends, all the boys joined Balaräma and complained to mother Yaçodä 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
90
that Kåñëa had eaten clay. On hearing this, mother Yaçodä caught hold 
of Kåñëa’s hand and said, “My dear Kåñëa, why have You eaten earth in 
a solitary place? Just see, all Your friends, including Balaräma, are 
complaining about You.” Being afraid of His mother, Kåñëa replied, “My 
dear mother, all these boys, including My elder brother, Balaräma, are 
speaking lies against Me. I have never eaten any clay. My elder brother, 
Balaräma, while playing with Me today, became angry, and therefore He 
has joined with the other boys to complain against Me. They have all 
combined together to complain so you will be angry and chastise Me. If 
you think they are truthful, then you can look within My mouth to see 
whether I have eaten clay or not.” His mother replied, “All right, if You 
have actually not eaten any clay, then just open Your mouth. I shall see.” 
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kåñëa was so ordered by His 
mother, He immediately opened His mouth just like an ordinary boy. 
Then mother Yaçodä saw within that mouth the complete opulence of 
creation. She saw the entire outer space in all directions, mountains, 
islands, oceans, seas, planets, air, fire, moon and stars. Along with the 
moon and the stars she also saw the entire elements—water, sky, the 
extensive ethereal existence along with the total ego and the products of 
the senses and the controller of the senses, all the demigods, the objects 
of the senses like sound and smell, and the three qualities of material 
nature. She also could perceive that within His mouth were all living 
entities, eternal time, material nature, spiritual nature, activity, 
consciousness and different forms of the whole creation. Yaçodä could 
find within the mouth of her child everything necessary for cosmic 
manifestation. She also saw, within His mouth, herself taking Kåñëa on 
her lap and having Him suck her breast. Upon seeing all this, she 
became struck with awe and began to wonder whether she were 
dreaming or actually seeing something extraordinary. She concluded 
that she was either dreaming or seeing the play of the illusory energy of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. She thought that she had become 
mad, mentally deranged, to see all those wonderful things. Then she 
thought, “It may be cosmic mystic power attained by my child, and 
therefore I am perplexed by such visions within His mouth. Let me offer 
my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who 
is beyond the expression of consciousness, mind, work and philosophical 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
91
speculation, and whose different energies produce everything 
manifested and unmanifested. Under His energy, bodily self and bodily 
possessions are conceived.” She then said, “Let me offer my respectful 
obeisances unto Him under whose illusory energy I am thinking that 
Nanda Mahäräja is my husband and Kåñëa is my son, that all the 
properties of Nanda Mahäräja belong to me and that all the cowherd 
men and women are my subjects. All this misconception is due to the 
illusory energy of the Supreme Lord. So let me pray to Him that He may 
protect me always.” 
While mother Yaçodä was thinking in this high philosophical way, Lord 
Kåñëa again expanded His internal energy just to bewilder her with 
maternal affection. Immediately mother Yaçodä forgot all philosophical 
speculation and accepted Kåñëa as her own child. She took Him on her 
lap and became overwhelmed with maternal affection. She thus began to 
think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is understood 
through the processes of cultivating knowledge derived from the 
Upaniñads and the Vedänta-sütra, practicing mystic yoga and studying 
Säìkhya philosophy, as her own begotten child. 
Certainly mother Yaçodä had executed many, many pious activities, as a 
result of which she got the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, as her son who sucked milk from her breast. Similarly, Nanda 
Mahäräja also must have performed many great sacrifices and pious 
activities for Lord Kåñëa to become his son and address him as “father.” 
But it is surprising that Vasudeva and Devaké did not enjoy the 
transcendental bliss of Kåñëa’s childhood pastimes, although Kåñëa was 
their real son. The childhood pastimes of Kåñëa are glorified even today 
by many sages and saintly persons, but Vasudeva and Devaké could not 
enjoy such childhood pastimes personally. The reason for this was 
explained by Çukadeva Gosvämé to Mahäräja Parékñit as follows. 
When the best of the Vasus, named Droëa, and his wife Dharä were 
ordered to increase progeny by Lord Brahmä, they said unto him, “Dear 
father, we are seeking your benediction. When we take birth again 
within the universe, may the Supreme Lord Kåñëa in His most attractive 
feature of childhood absorb our whole attention. May our dealings with 
Him be so powerful that simply by hearing of these childhood activities 
of His, anyone will very easily cross over the nescience of birth and 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
92
death.” Lord Brahmä agreed to give them the benediction, and as a 
result the same Droëa appeared as Nanda Mahäräja in Våndävana, and 
the same Dharä appeared as mother Yaçodä, the wife of Nanda 
Mahäräja. 
In this way, Nanda Mahäräja and his wife, mother Yaçodä, developed 
their unalloyed devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
having gotten Him as their son. And all the gopés and cowherd men who 
were associates of Kåñëa naturally developed their own different feelings 
of love for Kåñëa. 
Therefore, just to fulfill the benediction of Lord Brahmä, Lord Kåñëa 
appeared along with His plenary expansion, Balaräma, and performed all 
kinds of childhood pastimes in order to increase the transcendental 
pleasure of all the residents of Våndävana. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Eighth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Vision of the Universal Form.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
93
CHAPTER NINE 
Mother Yaçodä Binds Lord Kåñëa 
 
Once upon a time, seeing that her maidservant was engaged in different 
household duties, mother Yaçodä personally took charge of churning 
butter. And while she churned butter, she sang the childhood pastimes 
of Kåñëa and enjoyed thinking of her son. 
The end of her sari was tightly wrapped while she churned, and on 
account of her intense love for her son, milk automatically dripped from 
her breasts, which moved as she labored very hard, churning with two 
hands. The bangles and bracelets on her hands tinkled as they touched 
each other, and her earrings and breasts shook. There were drops of 
perspiration on her face, and the flower garland which was on her head 
scattered here and there. Before this picturesque sight, Lord Kåñëa 
appeared as a child. He felt hungry, and to increase His mother’s love, 
He wanted her to stop churning. He indicated that her first business was 
to let Him suck her breast, and then she could churn butter later. 
Mother Yaçodä took her son on her lap and pushed the nipple of her 
breasts into His mouth, and while Kåñëa was sucking the milk, she was 
smiling, enjoying the beauty of her child’s face. Suddenly, the milk 
which was on the stove began to boil over. Just to stop the milk from 
spilling, mother Yaçodä at once put Kåñëa aside and went to the stove. 
Left in that state by His mother, Kåñëa became very angry, and His lips 
and eyes became red in rage. He pressed His teeth and lips, and taking 
up a piece of stone, He immediately broke the butter pot. He took butter 
out of it, and with false tears in His eyes, He began to eat the butter in a 
secluded place. 
In the meantime, mother Yaçodä returned to the churning place after 
setting the overflowing milk pan in order. She saw the broken pot, in 
which the churning yogurt had been kept. Since she could not find her 
boy, she concluded that the broken pot was His work. She smiled as she 
thought, “The child is very clever. After breaking the pot He has left 
this place, fearing punishment.” After she sought all over, she found her 
son sitting on a big wooden grinding mortar, which was kept upside 
down. He was taking butter from a pot which was hanging from the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
94
ceiling on a swing, and He was feeding it to the monkeys. She saw Kåñëa 
looking this way and that way in fear of her because He was conscious of 
His naughty behavior. After seeing her son so engaged, she very silently 
approached Him from behind. Kåñëa, however, saw her coming toward 
Him with a stick in her hand, and He immediately got down from the 
grinding mortar and began to flee in fear. Mother Yaçodä chased Him to 
all corners, trying to capture the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who 
is never approached even by the meditations of great yogés. In other 
words, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, who is never caught 
by the yogés and speculators, was playing just like a little child for such a 
great devotee as mother Yaçodä. Mother Yaçodä, however, could not 
easily catch the fast-running child because of her thin waist and heavy 
body. Still she tried to follow Him as fast as possible. Her hair loosened, 
and the flowers in her hair fell to the ground. Although she was tired, 
she somehow reached her naughty child and captured Him. When He 
was caught, Kåñëa was almost on the point of crying. He smeared His 
hands over His eyes, which were anointed with black eye cosmetics. The 
child saw His mother’s face while she stood over Him, and His eyes 
became restless from fear. 
Mother Yaçodä could understand that Kåñëa was unnecessarily afraid, 
and for His benefit she wanted to allay His fears. Being the topmost 
well-wisher of her child, mother Yaçodä thought, “If the child is too 
fearful of me, I don’t know what will happen to Him.” Mother Yaçodä 
then threw away her stick. In order to punish Him, she thought to bind 
His hands with some ropes. She did not know it, but it was actually 
impossible for her to bind the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Mother 
Yaçodä was thinking that Kåñëa was her tiny child; she did not know 
that the child had no limitation. There is no inside or outside of Him, 
nor beginning or end. He is unlimited and all-pervading. Indeed, He is 
Himself the whole cosmic manifestation. Still, mother Yaçodä was 
thinking of Kåñëa as her child. Although He is beyond the reach of all 
senses, she endeavored to bind Him to a wooden grinding mortar. But 
when she tried to bind Him, she found that the rope she was using was 
too short—by two inches. She gathered more ropes from the house and 
added to it, but still she found the same shortage. In this way, she 
connected all the ropes available at home, but when the final knot was 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
95
added, she saw that it was still two inches too short. Mother Yaçodä was 
smiling, but she was astonished. How was it happening? 
In attempting to bind her son, she became tired. She was perspiring, and 
the garland on her head fell down. Then Lord Kåñëa appreciated the 
hard labor of His mother, and being compassionate upon her, He agreed 
to be bound up by the ropes. Kåñëa, playing as a human child in the 
house of mother Yaçodä, was performing His own selected pastimes. Of 
course, no one can control the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The 
pure devotee surrenders himself unto the lotus feet of the Lord, who may 
either protect or vanquish the devotee. But for his part, the devotee 
never forgets his own position of surrender. Similarly, the Lord also feels 
transcendental pleasure by submitting Himself to the protection of the 
devotee. This was exemplified by Kåñëa’s surrender unto His mother, 
Yaçodä. 
Kåñëa is the supreme bestower of all kinds of liberation to His devotees, 
but the benediction which was bestowed upon mother Yaçodä was never 
experienced even by Lord Brahmä or Lord Çiva or the goddess of 
fortune. 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as the son of 
Yaçodä and Nanda Mahäräja, is never so completely known to the yogés 
and speculators. But He is easily available to His devotees. Nor is He 
appreciated as the supreme reservoir of all pleasure by the yogés and 
speculators. 
After binding her son, mother Yaçodä engaged herself in household 
affairs. At that time, bound up to the wooden mortar, Kåñëa could see a 
pair of trees before Him which were known as arjuna trees. The great 
reservoir of pleasure, Lord Çré Kåñëa, thus thought to Himself, “Mother 
Yaçodä first of all left without feeding Me sufficient milk, and therefore 
I broke the pot of yogurt and distributed the stock butter in charity to 
the monkeys. Now she has bound Me up to a wooden mortar. So I shall 
do something more mischievous than before.” And thus He thought of 
pulling down the two very tall arjuna trees. 
There is a history behind the pair of arjuna trees. In their previous lives, 
the trees were born as the human sons of Kuvera, and their names were 
Nalaküvara and Maëigréva. Fortunately, they came within the vision of 
the Lord. In their previous lives they were cursed by the great sage 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
96
Närada in order to receive the highest benediction of seeing Lord Kåñëa. 
This benediction-curse was bestowed upon them because of their 
forgetfulness due to intoxication. This story will be narrated in the next 
chapter. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Ninth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Mother Yaçodä Binds Lord Kåñëa.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
97
CHAPTER TEN 
The Deliverance of Nalaküvara and Maëigréva 
 
The story of the cursing of Nalaküvara and Maëigréva and their 
deliverance by Kåñëa, under the all-blissful desire of the great sage 
Närada, is here described. 
The two great demigods Nalaküvara and Maëigréva were sons of the 
treasurer of the demigods, Kuvera, who was a great devotee of Lord Çiva. 
By the grace of Lord Çiva, Kuvera’s material opulences had no limit. As 
a rich man’s sons often become addicted to wine and women, so these 
two sons of Kuvera were also addicted to wine and sex. Once, these two 
demigods, desiring to enjoy, entered the garden of Lord Çiva in the 
province of Kailäsa on the bank of the Mandäkiné Ganges. There they 
drank much and engaged in hearing the sweet singing of beautiful 
women who accompanied them in that garden of fragrant flowers. In an 
intoxicated condition, they both entered the water of the Ganges, which 
was full with lotus flowers, and there they began to enjoy the company 
of the young girls exactly as the male elephant enjoys the female 
elephants within the water. 
While they were thus enjoying themselves in the water, all of a sudden 
Närada, the great sage, happened to pass that way. He could understand 
that the demigods Nalaküvara and Maëigréva were too much intoxicated 
and could not even see that he was passing. The young girls, however, 
were not so much intoxicated as the demigods, and they at once became 
ashamed at being naked before the great sage Närada. They began to 
cover themselves with all haste. The two demigod sons of Kuvera were so 
much intoxicated that they could not appreciate the presence of the 
sage Närada and therefore did not cover their bodies. On seeing the two 
demigods so degraded by intoxication, Närada desired their welfare, and 
therefore he exhibited his causeless mercy upon them by cursing them. 
Because the great sage was compassionate upon them, he wanted to 
finish their false enjoyment of intoxication and association with young 
girls and wanted them to see Lord Kåñëa face to face. He conceived of 
cursing them as follows. He said that the attraction for material 
enjoyment is due to an increase of the mode of passion. A person in the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
98
material world, when favored by the material opulence of riches, 
generally becomes addicted to three things—intoxication, sex and 
gambling. Materially opulent men, being puffed up with the 
accumulation of wealth, also become so merciless that they indulge in 
killing animals by opening slaughterhouses. And they think that they 
themselves will never die. Such foolish persons, forgetting the laws of 
nature, become overly infatuated with the body. They forget that the 
material body, even though very much advanced in civilization, up to 
the position of the demigods, will finally turn into ashes or stool. And 
while one is living, whatever the external condition of the body may be, 
within there is only stool, urine and various kinds of worms. Thus being 
engaged in jealousy and violence to other bodies, materialists cannot 
understand the ultimate goal of life, and without knowing this goal of 
life, they generally glide down to a hellish condition in their next life. 
Such foolish persons commit all kinds of sinful activities on account of 
this temporary body, and they are even unable to consider whether this 
body actually belongs to them. Generally it is said that the body belongs 
to the persons who feed the body. One might therefore consider whether 
this body belongs to one personally or to the master to whom one 
renders service. The master of slaves claims full right to the bodies of the 
slaves because the master feeds the slaves. It may also be questioned 
whether the body belongs to the father, who is the seed-giving master of 
this body, or to the mother, who develops the child’s body in her womb. 
Foolish persons are engaged in committing all sorts of sins due to the 
misconception of identifying the material body with the self. But one 
should be intelligent enough to understand to whom this body belongs. 
A foolish person indulges in killing animals to maintain the body, but he 
does not consider whether this body belongs to him or to his father or 
mother or maternal grandfather. Sometimes a father gives his daughter 
in charity to a person with a view of getting back the daughter’s child as 
a son. The body may also belong to a stronger man who forces it to work 
for him. Sometimes a slave’s body is sold to a master, and from that day 
on the body belongs to the master. And at the end of life the body 
belongs to the fire, because the body is given to the fire and burned to 
ashes. Or the body is thrown into the street to be eaten by the dogs and 
vultures. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
99
Before committing all kinds of sins to maintain the body, one should 
understand to whom the body belongs. Ultimately it is concluded that 
the body is a product of material nature, and at the end it merges into 
material nature; therefore, the conclusion should be that the body 
belongs to material nature. One should not wrongly think that the body 
belongs to him. To maintain a false possession, why should one indulge 
in killing? Why should one kill innocent animals to maintain the body? 
When a man is infatuated with the false prestige of opulence, he does 
not care for any moral instruction but indulges in wine, women and 
animal-killing. In such circumstances, a poverty-stricken man is often 
better situated because a poor man thinks of himself in relation to other 
bodies. A poor man often does not wish to inflict injuries upon other 
bodies because he can understand more readily that when he himself is 
injured he feels pain. As such, the great sage Närada considered that 
because the demigods Nalaküvara and Maëigréva were so infatuated by 
false prestige, they should be put into a condition of life devoid of 
opulence. 
A person who has a pinprick in his body does not wish others to be 
pricked by pins; a considerate man in the life of poverty does not wish 
others to be also put into that condition. Generally it is seen that one 
who has risen from a poverty-stricken life and becomes wealthy creates 
some charitable institution at the end of his life so that other poverty-
stricken men might be benefited. In short, a compassionate poor man 
may consider others’ pains and pleasures with empathy. A poor man is 
seldom puffed up with false pride, and he may be freed from all kinds of 
infatuation. He may remain satisfied by whatever he gets for his 
maintenance by the grace of the Lord. 
To remain in the poverty-stricken condition is a kind of austerity. 
According to Vedic culture, therefore, the brähmaëas, as a matter of 
routine, keep themselves in a poverty-stricken condition to save 
themselves from the false prestige of material opulence. False prestige 
due to advancement of material prosperity is a great impediment for 
spiritual emancipation. A poverty-stricken man cannot become 
unnaturally fat by eating more and more. And on account of not being 
able to eat more than he requires, his senses are not very turbulent. 
When the senses are not very turbulent, he cannot become violent. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
100
Another advantage of poverty is that a saintly person can easily enter a 
poor man’s house, and thus the poor man can take advantage of the 
saintly person’s association. A very opulent man does not allow anyone 
to enter his house; therefore, the saintly person cannot enter. According 
to the Vedic system, a saintly person takes the position of a mendicant 
so that on the plea of begging something from the householder, he can 
enter any house. The householder, who has usually forgotten everything 
about spiritual advancement because he is busy maintaining family 
affairs, can be benefited by the association of a saintly person. There is a 
great chance for the poor man to become liberated through association 
with a saint. Of what use are persons who are puffed up with material 
opulence and prestige if they are bereft of the association of saintly 
persons and devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead? 
The great sage Närada thereafter thought that it was his duty to put 
those demigods into a condition where they could not be falsely proud of 
their material opulence and prestige. Närada was compassionate and 
wanted to save them from their fallen life. They were in the mode of 
darkness, and being therefore unable to control their senses, they were 
addicted to sex life. It was the duty of a saintly person like Närada to 
save them from their abominable condition. In animal life, the animal 
has no sense to understand that he is naked. But Kuvera was the 
treasurer of the demigods, a very responsible man, and Nalaküvara and 
Maëigréva were two of his sons. And yet they became so animalistic and 
irresponsible that they could not understand, due to intoxication, that 
they were naked. To cover the lower part of the body is a principle of 
human civilization, and when men or women forget this principle, they 
become no better than animals. Närada therefore thought that the best 
punishment for them was to make them immovable living entities, or 
trees. Trees are, by nature’s laws, immovable. Although trees are covered 
by the mode of ignorance, they cannot do harm. The great sage Närada 
thought it fitting that, although the brothers would be punished to 
become trees, by his mercy they would continue to keep their memory 
and be able to know why they were being punished. After changing the 
body, a living entity generally forgets his previous life, but in special 
cases, by the grace of the Lord, as with Nalaküvara and Maëigréva, one 
can remember. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
101
Sage Närada therefore contemplated that the two demigods should 
remain for one hundred years, in the time of the demigods, in the form 
of trees, and after that they would be fortunate enough to see the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face, by His causeless mercy. 
And thus they would be again promoted to the life of the demigods and 
become great devotees of the Lord. 
After this, the great sage Närada returned to his abode, known as 
Näräyaëäçrama, and the two demigods turned into trees, known as twin 
arjuna trees. The two demigods were favored by the causeless mercy of 
Närada and given a chance to grow in Nanda’s courtyard and see Lord 
Kåñëa face to face. 
Although child Kåñëa was bound up to the wooden mortar, He began to 
crawl towards the twin trees in order to fulfill the prophecy of His great 
devotee Närada. Lord Kåñëa knew that Närada was His great devotee 
and that the trees standing before Him as twin arjuna trees were actually 
the sons of Kuvera. “I must now fulfill the words of My great devotee 
Närada,” He thought. Then He proceeded through the passage between 
the two trees. Although He was able to pass through the passage, the 
large wooden mortar stuck horizontally between the trees. Taking 
advantage of this, with great strength Lord Kåñëa began to pull the rope, 
which was tied to the mortar. As soon as He pulled, the two trees, with 
all their branches and limbs, fell down immediately with a great sound. 
Out of the broken, fallen trees came two great personalities, shining like 
blazing fire. All sides became illuminated and beautiful by their 
presence. The two purified personalities immediately came before child 
Kåñëa and bowed down to offer their respects and prayers in the 
following words. 
“Dear Lord Kåñëa, You are the original Personality of Godhead, master 
of all mystic powers. Learned brähmaëas know very well that this cosmic 
manifestation is an expansion of Your potencies, which are sometimes 
manifest and sometimes unmanifest. You are the original provider of the 
life, body and senses of all living entities. You are the eternal God, Lord 
Viñëu, who is all-pervading, the imperishable controller of everything, 
and You are eternal time. You are the original source of the cosmic 
manifestation, which is acting under the spell of the three modes of 
material nature—goodness, passion and ignorance. You are living as the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
102
Supersoul in all the multiforms of living entities, and You know very 
well what is going on within their bodies and minds. Therefore You are 
the supreme director of all activities of all living entities. But although 
You are in the midst of everything which is under the spell of the 
material modes of nature, You are not affected by such contaminated 
qualities. No one under the jurisdiction of the material modes can 
understand Your transcendental qualities, which existed before the 
creation; therefore You are called the Supreme Transcendence. Let us 
offer our respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of You, Lord 
Väsudeva, the Supreme Brahman, who are always glorified by Your 
personal internal potencies. 
“In this material world You make Yourself known only by Your different 
incarnations. Although You assume different types of bodies, these 
bodies are not part of the material creation. They are always full of the 
transcendental potencies of unlimited opulence, strength, beauty, fame, 
wisdom and renunciation. In the material existence there is a difference 
between the body and the owner of the body, but because You appear in 
Your original spiritual body, there is no such difference for You. When 
You appear, Your uncommon activities indicate that You are the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such uncommon activities are not 
possible for anyone in material existence. You, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, cause the birth and death as well as the liberation of the 
living entities, and You are full with all Your plenary expansions. You 
can bestow on everyone all kinds of benedictions. O Lord! O source of 
all auspiciousness and goodness, we offer our respectful obeisances unto 
You. You are the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
supreme source of peace and the supreme personality in the dynasty of 
King Yadu. O Lord, our father, known as Kuvera, the demigod, is Your 
servant. Similarly, the great sage Närada is also Your servitor, and only 
by their grace have we been able to see You personally. We therefore 
pray that we may always be engaged in Your transcendental loving 
service by speaking only about Your glories and hearing about Your 
transcendental activities. May our hands and other limbs be engaged in 
Your service and our minds always be concentrated at Your lotus feet 
and our heads always bowed down before the all-pervading universal 
form of Your Lordship.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
103
When the demigods Nalaküvara and Maëigréva finished their prayers, 
the child, Lord Kåñëa, the master and proprietor of Gokula, bound to the 
wooden grinding mortar by the ropes of Yaçodä, smiled and said, “It was 
already known to Me that My great devotee Närada Muni had shown his 
causeless mercy by saving you from the abominable condition of pride 
due to possessing extraordinary beauty and opulence in a family of 
demigods. He has saved you from gliding down into the lowest condition 
of hellish life. All these facts are already known to Me. You are very 
fortunate because not only were you cursed by him, but you had the 
great opportunity to see him. If someone is able, by chance, to see face to 
face a great saintly person like Närada, who is always serene and 
merciful to everyone, then immediately that conditioned soul becomes 
liberated. This is exactly like being situated in the full light of the sun: 
there cannot be any visionary impediment. Therefore, O Nalaküvara 
and Maëigréva, your lives have now become successful because you have 
developed ecstatic love for Me. This is your last birth within material 
existence. Now you can go back to your father’s residence in the 
heavenly planets, and by remaining in the attitude of devotional service, 
you will be liberated in this very life.” 
After this, the demigods circumambulated the Lord many times and 
bowed down before Him again and again, and thus they left. The Lord 
remained bound up with ropes to the grinding mortar. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Tenth Chapter of Kåñëa, “The 
Deliverance of Nalaküvara and Maëigréva.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
104
CHAPTER ELEVEN 
Killing the Demons Vatsäsura and Bakäsura 
 
When the twin arjuna trees fell to the ground, making a sound like the 
falling of thunderbolts, all the inhabitants of Gokula, including Nanda 
Mahäräja, immediately came to the spot. They were very much 
astonished to see how the two great trees had suddenly fallen. Because 
they could find no reason for their falling down, they were puzzled. 
When they saw child Kåñëa bound up to the wooden mortar by the ropes 
of mother Yaçodä, they thought that it must have been caused by some 
demon. Otherwise, how was it possible? At the same time, they were 
very much perturbed because such uncommon incidents were always 
happening to child Kåñëa. While the cowherd men were thus 
contemplating, the small children who were playing there informed the 
men that the trees had fallen because Kåñëa had pulled the wooden 
mortar with the rope binding Him. “Kåñëa came in between the two 
trees,” they explained, “and the wooden mortar was topsy-turvied and 
stuck in between the trees. Kåñëa pulled the rope, and the trees fell 
down. When the trees fell down, two very dazzling men came out of the 
trees, and they said something to Kåñëa.” 
Most of the cowherd men did not believe the statement of the children. 
They could not believe that such things were at all possible. Some of the 
men, however, believed them and told Nanda Mahäräja, “Your child is 
different from all other children. He just might have done it.” Nanda 
Mahäräja smiled to hear about the extraordinary abilities of his son. He 
came forward and untied the knot just to free his wonderful child. After 
being freed by Nanda Mahäräja, Kåñëa was taken onto the laps of the 
elder gopés. They took Him away to the courtyard of the house and began 
to clap, praising His wonderful activities. Kåñëa danced along with their 
clapping, just like an ordinary child. The Supreme Lord Kåñëa, being 
completely controlled by the gopés, sang and danced just like a puppet in 
their hands. 
Sometimes mother Yaçodä used to ask Kåñëa to bring her a wooden 
plank for sitting. Although the wooden plank was too heavy to be 
carried by a child, still somehow or other Kåñëa would bring it to His 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
105
mother. Sometimes, while worshiping Näräyaëa, His father would ask 
Him to bring his wooden slippers, and Kåñëa, with great difficulty, would 
put the slippers on His head and bring them to His father. When He was 
asked to lift some heavy article and was unable to lift it, He would simply 
move His arms. In this way, daily, at every moment, He was the reservoir 
of all pleasure to His parents. The Lord was exhibiting such childish 
dealings with the inhabitants of Våndävana because He wanted to show 
the great philosophers and sages searching after the Absolute Truth how 
the Supreme Absolute Truth Personality of Godhead is controlled by 
and subject to the desires of His pure devotees. 
One day, a fruit vendor came before the house of Nanda Mahäräja. 
Upon hearing the vendor call, “If anyone wants fruits please come and 
take them from me!” child Kåñëa immediately took some grains in His 
palm and went to get fruits in exchange. In those days exchange was by 
barter; therefore Kåñëa might have seen His parents acquire fruits and 
other things by bartering grains, and so He imitated. But His palms were 
very small, and He was not very careful to hold them tight, so He was 
dropping the grains. The vendor who came to sell fruits saw this and was 
very much captivated by the beauty of the Lord, so she immediately 
accepted whatever few grains were left in His palm and filled His hands 
with fruits. In the meantime, the vendor saw that her whole basket of 
fruit had become filled with jewels. The Lord is the bestower of all 
benediction. If someone gives something to the Lord, he is not the loser; 
he is the gainer by a million times. 
One day Lord Kåñëa, the liberator of the twin arjuna trees, was playing 
with Balaräma and the other children on the bank of the Yamunä, and 
because it was already late, Rohiëé, the mother of Balaräma, went to call 
them back home. But Balaräma and Kåñëa were so engrossed in playing 
with Their friends that They did not wish to come back; They just 
engaged Themselves in playing more and more. When Rohiëé was 
unable to take Them back home, she went home and sent mother 
Yaçodä to call Them again. Mother Yaçodä was so affectionate toward 
her son that as soon as she came out to call Him back home, her breast 
filled up with milk. She loudly cried, “My dear child, please come back 
home. Your time for lunch is already past.” She then said, “My dear 
Kåñëa, O my dear lotus-eyed child, please come and suck my breast. You 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
106
have played enough. You must be very hungry, my dear little child. You 
must be tired from playing for so long.” She also addressed Balaräma 
thus: “My dear Räma, the glory of Your family, my dear child, please 
come back with Your younger brother Kåñëa immediately. You have 
been engaged in playing since morning, and You must be very tired. 
Please come back and take Your lunch at home. Your father Nandaräja 
is waiting for You. He has to eat, so You must come back so that he can 
eat.” 
As soon as Kåñëa and Balaräma heard that Nanda Mahäräja was waiting 
for Them and could not take his food in Their absence, They started to 
return. Their playmates complained, “Kåñëa is leaving us just at the 
point when our playing is at the summit. Next time we shall not allow 
Him to leave.” 
His playmates then threatened not to allow Him to play with them 
again. Kåñëa became afraid, and instead of going back home, He went 
back again to play with the boys. At that time, mother Yaçodä scolded 
the children and told Kåñëa, “My dear Kåñëa, do You think that You are 
a street boy? You have no home? Please come back to Your home! I see 
that Your body has become very dirty from playing since morning. Now 
come home and take Your bath. Besides, today is Your birthday 
ceremony; therefore You should come back home and give cows in 
charity to the brähmaëas. Don’t You see how Your playmates are 
decorated with ornaments by their mothers? You should also be cleansed 
and decorated with nice dress and ornaments. Please, therefore, come 
back, take Your bath, dress Yourself nicely, and then again You may go 
on playing.” 
In this way mother Yaçodä called back Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma, who 
are worshipable by great demigods like Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva. She 
was thinking of Them as her children. 
When mother Yaçodä’s children, Kåñëa and Balaräma, came home, she 
bathed Them very nicely and dressed Them with ornaments. She then 
called for the brähmaëas, and through her children she gave many cows 
in charity for the occasion of Kåñëa’s birthday. In this way she 
performed the birthday ceremony of Kåñëa at home. 
After this incident, all the elderly cowherd men assembled together, and 
Nanda Mahäräja presided. They began to consult amongst themselves 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
107
how to stop great disturbances in the Mahävana on account of the 
demons. In this meeting, Upananda, the brother of Nanda Mahäräja, 
was present. He was considered to be learned and experienced, and he 
was a well-wisher of Kåñëa and Balaräma. He was a leader, and he 
addressed the meeting as follows: “My dear friends! Now we should leave 
here for another place because we are continually finding that great 
demons are coming here to disturb the peaceful situation, and they are 
especially attempting to kill the small children. Just consider Pütanä and 
Kåñëa. It was simply by the grace of Lord Hari that Kåñëa was saved from 
the hands of such a great demon. Next the whirlwind demon took Kåñëa 
away in the sky, but by the grace of Lord Hari He was saved, and the 
demon fell down on a stone slab and died. Very recently, this child was 
playing between two trees, and the trees fell down violently, and yet 
there was no injury to the child. So Lord Hari saved Him again. Just 
imagine the calamity if this child or any other child playing with Him 
were crushed by the falling trees! Considering all these incidents, we 
must conclude that this place is no longer safe. Let us leave. We have all 
been saved from different calamities by the grace of Lord Hari. Now we 
should be cautious and leave this place and reside somewhere where we 
can live peacefully. I think that we should all go to the forest known as 
Våndävana, where just now there are newly grown plants and herbs. It is 
very suitable for pasturing ground for our cows, and we and our families, 
the gopés with their children, can very peacefully live there. Near 
Våndävana is Govardhana Hill, which is very beautiful, and there is 
newly grown grass and fodder for the animals, so there will be no 
difficulty in living there. I therefore suggest that we start immediately 
for that beautiful place, as there is no need to waste any more time. Let 
us prepare all our carts immediately, and, if you like, let us go, keeping 
all the cows in front.” 
On hearing the statement of Upananda, all the cowherd men 
immediately agreed. “Let us immediately go there.” Everyone then 
loaded all their household furniture and utensils on the carts and 
prepared to go to Våndävana. All the old men of the village, the 
children and the women were arranged on seats, and the cowherd men 
equipped themselves with bows and arrows to follow the carts. All the 
cows and bulls were placed in the front along with their calves, and the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
108
men, with their bows and arrows, surrounded the herds and carts and 
began to blow on their horns and bugles. In this way, with tumultuous 
sound, they started for Våndävana. 
And who can describe the damsels of Vraja? They were all seated on the 
carts and were very beautifully dressed with ornaments and costly saris. 
They chanted the pastimes of child Kåñëa as usual. Mother Yaçodä and 
mother Rohiëé were seated on a separate cart, and Kåñëa and Balaräma 
were seated on their laps. While mother Rohiëé and Yaçodä were riding 
on the cart, they talked to Kåñëa and Balaräma, and feeling the pleasure 
of such talks, they looked very, very beautiful. 
In this way, after reaching Våndävana, where everyone lives eternally, 
very peacefully and happily, they encircled Våndävana, drew all the 
carts together in a half circle, and in this way constructed a temporary 
residence. When Kåñëa and Balaräma saw the beautiful appearance of 
Våndävana, Govardhana Hill and the banks of the river Yamunä, They 
felt very happy. As They grew up They began talking with Their parents 
and others in childish language, and thus They gave great pleasure to all 
the inhabitants of Våndävana. 
Soon Kåñëa and Balaräma had grown sufficiently to be given charge of 
the calves. From the very beginning of their childhood, cowherd boys 
are trained to take care of the cows, and their first responsibility is to 
take care of the little calves. So along with the other little cowherd boys, 
Kåñëa and Balaräma went into the pasturing ground and took charge of 
the calves, and there They played with Their playmates. While taking 
charge of the calves, sometimes the two brothers played on Their flutes. 
And sometimes They played with ämalaka fruits and bael fruits, just as 
small children play with balls. Sometimes They danced and made 
tinkling sounds with Their ankle bells. Sometimes They made 
Themselves into bulls and cows by covering Themselves with blankets. 
Thus Kåñëa and Balaräma played. The two brothers also used to imitate 
the sounds of bulls and cows and play at bullfighting. Sometimes They 
used to imitate the sounds of various animals and birds. In this way, 
They enjoyed Their childhood pastimes apparently like ordinary, 
mundane children. 
Once, when Kåñëa and Balaräma were playing on the bank of the 
Yamunä, a demon of the name Vatsäsura assumed the shape of a calf and 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
109
came there intending to kill the brothers. By taking the shape of a calf, 
the demon could mingle with the other calves. Kåñëa, however, 
specifically noticed this, and He immediately alerted Balaräma about the 
entrance of the demon. Both brothers then silently approached him. 
Kåñëa caught hold of the demon-calf by the two hind legs and tail, 
whipped him around very forcibly and threw him up into a tree. The 
demon lost his life and fell down from the top of the tree to the ground. 
When the demon lay dead on the ground, all the playmates of Kåñëa 
congratulated Him, “Well done, well done,” and the demigods in the sky 
showered flowers with great satisfaction. In this way, the maintainers of 
the complete creation, Kåñëa and Balaräma, used to take care of the 
calves every day, beginning in the morning, and thus They enjoyed 
Their childhood pastimes as cowherd boys in Våndävana. 
One day, all the cowherd boys went to the bank of the river Yamunä to 
water their calves. When the calves drank water from the Yamunä, the 
boys also drank. After drinking, when they were sitting on the bank of 
the river, they saw a huge animal which looked something like a heron 
and was as big as a hill. Its top was as strong as a thunderbolt. When they 
saw that unusual animal, they became afraid of it. The name of this 
beast was Bakäsura, and he was a friend of Kaàsa’s. He appeared on the 
scene suddenly and immediately attacked Kåñëa with his pointed, sharp 
beak and quickly swallowed Him up. When Kåñëa was thus swallowed, 
all the boys, headed by Balaräma, became almost breathless, as if they 
had died. But when the Bakäsura demon was swallowing up Kåñëa, he 
felt a burning, fiery sensation in his throat. This was due to the glowing 
effulgence of Kåñëa. The demon quickly threw Kåñëa up and tried to kill 
Him by pinching Him in his beak. Bakäsura did not know that although 
Kåñëa was playing the part of a child of Nanda Mahäräja, He was still 
the original father of Lord Brahmä, the creator of the universe. Mother 
Yaçodä’s child, who is the reservoir of pleasure for the demigods and who 
is the maintainer of saintly persons, caught hold of the great gigantic 
heron by the two halves of his beak and, before His cowherd boyfriends, 
bifurcated his mouth, just as a child very easily splits a blade of grass. 
From the sky, the denizens of the heavenly planets showered flowers like 
the mallikä, the most fragrant of all flowers, as a token of their 
congratulations. Accompanying the showers of flowers was a vibration 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
110
of bugles, drums and conchshells. 
When the boys saw the showering of flowers and heard the celestial 
sounds, they became struck with wonder. And when they saw Kåñëa 
freed from the mouth of the great demon Bakäsura, all of them, 
including Balaräma, were so pleased that it seemed as if they had 
regained their very source of life. As soon as they saw Kåñëa coming 
towards them, they one after another embraced the son of Nanda and 
held Him to their chests. After this, they assembled all the calves under 
their charge and began to return home. 
When they arrived home, they spoke of the wonderful activities of the 
son of Nanda. When the gopés and cowherd men all heard the story from 
the boys, they felt great happiness because naturally they loved Kåñëa, 
and by hearing about His glories and victorious activities they became 
still more affectionate toward Him. Thinking that child Kåñëa had been 
saved from the mouth of death, they looked upon His face with great 
love and affection. Indeed, they could not turn their faces from the 
vision of Kåñëa. The gopés and the men began to converse amongst 
themselves about how wonderful it was that child Kåñëa had been 
attacked in so many ways and so many times by so many demons, and yet 
the demons themselves had been killed and Kåñëa had remained 
uninjured. They continued to converse amongst themselves about how 
so many great demons in such fierce bodies had attacked Kåñëa to kill 
Him but, by the grace of Hari, had not been able to cause even a slight 
injury. Rather, they had died like small flies in a fire. Thus they 
remembered the words of Garga Muni, who had foretold, by dint of his 
vast knowledge of the Vedas and astrology, that this boy would be 
attacked by many demons. Now they were actually seeing that this was 
coming true, word for word. 
All the cowherd men, including Nanda Mahäräja, used to talk of the 
wonderful activities of Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma, and they were always 
so much absorbed in those talks that they forgot the threefold miseries of 
this material existence. This is the effect of Kåñëa consciousness. What 
was enjoyed five thousand years ago by Nanda Mahäräja can still be 
enjoyed by persons who are in Kåñëa consciousness simply by talking 
about the transcendental pastimes of Kåñëa and His associates. 
In this way Balaräma and Kåñëa enjoyed Their childhood pastimes, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
111
imitating Lord Rämacandra’s monkeys, who constructed the bridge over 
the ocean, and Hanumän, who jumped over the water to Ceylon. They 
used to imitate such pastimes among Their friends and so happily passed 
Their childhood life. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Eleventh Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Killing the Demons Vatsäsura and Bakäsura.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
112
CHAPTER TWELVE 
The Killing of the Aghäsura Demon 
 
Once the Lord desired to go early in the morning with all His cowherd 
boyfriends to the forest, where they were to assemble together and take 
lunch. As soon as He got up from bed, He blew His buffalo-horn bugle 
and called all His friends together. Keeping the calves before them, they 
started for the forest in a great procession. In this way, Lord Kåñëa 
assembled thousands of His boyfriends. They were each equipped with a 
stick, flute and horn, as well as a lunch bag, and each of them was taking 
care of thousands of calves. All the boys appeared very jolly and happy 
in that excursion. Each and every one of them, including Kåñëa, was 
attentive to his personal calves as he herded them in the different places 
in the forest. The boys were fully decorated with various kinds of golden 
ornaments, yet out of sporting propensities they began to pick up 
flowers, leaves, twigs, peacock feathers and red clay from different places 
in the forest and further decorate themselves in different ways. While 
passing through the forest, one boy stole another boy’s lunch package 
and passed it to a third. And when the boy whose lunch package was 
stolen came to know of it, he tried to take it back. But the boy who had 
it threw it to another boy. This sportive playing went on amongst the 
boys as childhood pastimes. 
When Lord Kåñëa went ahead to a distant place in order to see some 
specific scenery, the boys behind Him ran to try to catch up and be the 
first to touch Him. So there was a great competition. One would say, “I 
will go there and touch Kåñëa,” and another would say, “Oh, you cannot 
go. I’ll touch Kåñëa first.” Some of them played on their flutes or 
vibrated bugles made of buffalo horn. Some of them gladly followed the 
peacocks and imitated the onomatopoetic sounds of the cuckoo. While 
the birds were flying in the sky, the boys ran after the birds’ shadows 
along the ground and tried to follow their exact courses. Some of them 
went to the monkeys and silently sat down by them, and some of them 
imitated the dancing of the peacocks. Some of them caught the tails of 
the monkeys and played with them, and when the monkeys jumped into 
a tree, the boys followed. When a monkey showed its face and teeth, a 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
113
boy imitated and showed his teeth to the monkey. Some of the boys 
played with the frogs on the bank of the Yamunä, and when, out of fear, 
the frogs jumped into the water, the boys immediately dove in after 
them, and they would come out of the water when they saw their own 
shadows and stand imitating, making caricatures and laughing. They 
would also go to an empty well and make loud sounds, and when the 
echo came back, they would call it ill names and laugh. 
As stated personally by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the 
Bhagavad-gétä, He is realized proportionately by transcendentalists as 
Brahman, Paramätmä and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Here, 
in confirmation of the same statement, Lord Kåñëa, who awards the 
impersonalist the pleasure of Brahman realization by His bodily 
effulgence, also gives pleasure to the devotees as the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. Those who are under the spell of the external 
energy, mäyä, take Him only as a beautiful child. Yet He gave full 
transcendental pleasure to the cowherd boys who played with Him. Only 
after accumulating heaps of pious activities were those boys promoted to 
personally associate with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Who can 
estimate the transcendental fortune of the residents of Våndävana? 
They were personally seeing the Supreme Personality of Godhead face 
to face, He whom many yogés cannot find even after undergoing severe 
austerities, although He is sitting within their hearts. This is confirmed 
in the Brahma-saàhitä: One may search for Kåñëa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, through the pages of the Vedas and Upaniñads, 
but it is difficult to find Him there. However, one who is fortunate 
enough to associate with a devotee can see the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead face to face. After accumulating pious activities in many, many 
previous lives, the cowherd boys were seeing Kåñëa face to face and 
playing with Him as friends. They could not understand that Kåñëa is 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but they were playing as intimate 
friends with intense love for Him. 
When Lord Kåñëa was enjoying His childhood pastimes with His 
boyfriends, one Aghäsura demon became very impatient. He was unable 
to tolerate seeing Kåñëa play so happily, and therefore he appeared 
before the boys intending to kill them all. This Aghäsura was so 
dangerous that even the denizens of heaven were afraid of him. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
114
Although the denizens of heaven drank nectar daily to prolong their 
lives, they were afraid of this Aghäsura and were wondering, “When will 
the demon be killed?” The denizens used to drink nectar to become 
immortal, but actually they were not confident of their immortality. On 
the other hand, the boys who were playing with Kåñëa had no fear of the 
demons. They were free of fear. Any material arrangement for 
protecting oneself from death is always unsure, but if one is in Kåñëa 
consciousness, then immortality is confidently assured. 
The demon Aghäsura appeared before Kåñëa and His friends. Aghäsura 
happened to be the younger brother of Pütanä and Bakäsura, and he 
thought, “Kåñëa has killed my brother and sister. Now I shall kill Him 
along with all His friends and calves.” Aghäsura was instigated by 
Kaàsa, so he had come with determination. Aghäsura also thought that 
when he would offer grains and water in memory of his brother and 
sister and kill Kåñëa and all the cowherd boys, then automatically all the 
inhabitants of Våndävana would die. Generally, for the householders, 
the children are the life and breath force. When all the children die, 
then naturally the parents also die on account of strong affection for 
them. 
Aghäsura, thus deciding to kill all the inhabitants of Våndävana, 
expanded himself by the yogic siddhi called mahimä. The demons are 
generally expert in achieving almost all kinds of mystic powers. In the 
yoga system, by the perfection called mahimä-siddhi, one can expand 
himself as he desires. The demon Aghäsura expanded himself up to eight 
miles and assumed the shape of a very fat serpent. Having attained this 
wonderful body, he stretched his mouth open just like a mountain cave. 
Desiring to swallow all the boys at once, including Kåñëa and Balaräma, 
he sat on the path. 
The demon in the shape of a big fat serpent expanded his lips from land 
to sky; his lower lip was touching the ground, and his upper lip was 
touching the clouds. His jaws appeared like a big mountain cave, without 
limitation, and his teeth appeared just like mountain summits. His 
tongue appeared to be a broad traffic way, and he was breathing just like 
a hurricane. His eyes were blazing like fire. At first the boys thought that 
the demon was a statue, but after examining it they saw that it was a big 
serpent lying down on the road and widening his mouth. The boys began 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
115
to talk among themselves: “Dear friends, this figure appears to be a great 
animal, and he is sitting in such a posture just to swallow us all. Just 
see—is it not a big snake that has widened his mouth to eat all of us?” 
One of them said, “Yes, what you say is true. This animal’s upper lip 
appears to be just like the sunshine, and its lower lip is just like the 
reflection of red sunshine on the ground. Dear friends, just look to the 
right- and left-hand side of the mouth of the animal. Its mouth appears 
to be like a big mountain cave, and its height cannot be estimated. The 
chin is also raised just like a mountain summit. That long highway 
appears to be its tongue, and inside the mouth it is as dark as in a 
mountain cave. The hot wind that is blowing like a hurricane is his 
breathing, and the fishy bad smell coming out from his mouth is the 
smell of his intestines.” 
Then they further consulted among themselves: “If we all at one time 
entered into the mouth of this great serpent, how could it possibly 
swallow all of us? And even if it were to swallow all of us at once, it could 
not swallow Kåñëa. Kåñëa will immediately kill him, as He did Bakäsura.” 
Talking in this way, all the boys looked at the beautiful lotuslike face of 
Kåñëa, and they began to clap and smile. And so they marched forward 
and entered the mouth of the gigantic serpent. 
Meanwhile, Kåñëa, who is the Supersoul within everyone’s heart, could 
understand that the big statuesque figure was a demon. The boys did not 
know this, however, and thus while Kåñëa was planning how to stop the 
destruction of His intimate friends, all the boys along with their cows 
and calves entered the mouth of the serpent. But Kåñëa did not enter. 
The demon was awaiting Kåñëa’s entrance, and he was thinking, 
“Everyone has entered except Kåñëa, who has killed my brother and 
sister.” 
Kåñëa is the assurance of safety to everyone. But when He saw that His 
friends were already out of His hands and were lying within the belly of 
a great serpent, He became momentarily aggrieved. He was also struck 
with wonder at how the external energy works so wonderfully. He then 
began to consider how He could kill the demon and at the same time 
save the boys and calves. Although there was no factual concern on 
Kåñëa’s part, He was thinking like that. Finally, after some deliberation, 
He also entered the mouth of the demon. When Kåñëa entered, all the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
116
demigods, who had gathered to see the fun and who were hiding within 
the clouds, expressed their feelings with the words “Alas! Alas!” At the 
same time, all the friends of Aghäsura, especially Kaàsa, who were all 
accustomed to eating flesh and blood, expressed their jubilation, 
understanding that Kåñëa had also entered the mouth of the demon. 
While the demon was trying to smash Kåñëa and His companions, Kåñëa 
heard the demigods crying “Alas! Alas!” and He immediately began to 
expand Himself within the throat of the demon. Although he had a 
gigantic body, the demon choked by the expanding of Kåñëa. His big 
eyes moved violently, and he quickly suffocated. His life air could not 
come out from any source, and ultimately it burst out of a hole in the 
upper part of his skull. Thus his life air passed off. After the demon was 
dead, Kåñëa, with His transcendental glance alone, brought all the boys 
and calves back to consciousness and came with them out of the mouth 
of the demon. While Kåñëa was within the mouth of Aghäsura, the 
demon’s spirit soul came out like a dazzling light, illuminating all 
directions, and waited in the sky. As soon as Kåñëa came out of the 
mouth of the demon with His calves and friends, that glittering 
effulgent light immediately merged into the body of Kåñëa within the 
vision of all the demigods. 
The demigods became overwhelmed with joy and showered flowers on 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, and thus they worshiped 
Him. The denizens of heaven danced in jubilation, and the denizens in 
Gandharvaloka offered various kinds of prayers. Drummers beat drums 
in jubilation, the brähmaëas recited Vedic hymns, and all the devotees 
of the Lord chanted the words “Jaya! Jaya! All glories to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead!” 
When Lord Brahmä heard those auspicious vibrations, which sounded 
throughout the higher planetary system, he immediately came down to 
see what had happened. He saw that the demon was killed, and he was 
struck with wonder at the uncommon, glorious pastimes of the 
Personality of Godhead. 
The gigantic mouth of the demon remained in an open position for 
many days and gradually dried up; it remained a spot of pleasure 
pastimes for all the cowherd boys. 
The killing of Aghäsura took place when Kåñëa and all His boyfriends 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
117
were under five years old. Children under five years old are called 
kaumära, from five years up to the tenth year they are called paugaëòa, 
and from the tenth year up to the fifteenth year they are called kaiçora. 
After the fifteenth year, boys are called youths. For one year there was 
no discussion of the incident of the Aghäsura demon in the village of 
Vraja. But when the boys attained their sixth year, they informed their 
parents of the incident with great wonder. 
For Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is far greater 
than such demigods as Lord Brahmä, it is not at all difficult to award one 
the opportunity of merging with His eternal body. This He awarded to 
Aghäsura. Aghäsura was certainly the most sinful living entity, and it is 
not possible for the sinful to merge into the existence of the Absolute 
Truth. But in this particular case, because Kåñëa entered into Aghäsura’s 
body, the demon became fully cleansed of all sinful reactions. Persons 
constantly thinking of the eternal form of the Lord in the shape of the 
Deity or in the shape of a mental form are awarded the transcendental 
benediction of entering into the kingdom of God and associating with 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. So we can just imagine the 
elevated position of someone like Aghäsura, into whose body the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, personally entered. Great 
sages, meditators and devotees constantly keep the form of the Lord 
within their hearts, or they see the Deity form of the Lord in the 
temples; in that way they become liberated from all material 
contamination and at the end of the body enter into the kingdom of 
God. This perfection is possible simply by keeping the form of the Lord 
within the mind. But in the case of Aghäsura, the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead personally entered. Aghäsura’s position was therefore 
greater than the ordinary devotee’s or the greatest yogé’s. 
Mahäräja Parékñit, who was engaged in hearing the transcendental 
pastimes of Lord Kåñëa (who saved the life of Mahäräja Parékñit while he 
was in the womb of his mother), became more and more interested to 
hear about Him. And thus he questioned the sage Çukadeva Gosvämé, 
who was reciting Çrémad-Bhägavatam before the King. 
King Parékñit was a bit astonished to understand that the killing of the 
Aghäsura demon was not discussed for one year, until after the boys 
attained the paugaëòa age. Mahäräja Parékñit was very inquisitive to 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
118
learn about this, for he was sure that such an incident was due to the 
working of Kåñëa’s different energies. 
Generally, the kñatriyas or the administrative class are always busy with 
their political affairs, and they have very little chance to hear about the 
transcendental pastimes of Lord Kåñëa. But while Parékñit Mahäräja was 
hearing these transcendental pastimes, he considered himself to be very 
fortunate because not only was he hearing Kåñëa’s pastimes but he was 
doing so from Çukadeva Gosvämé, the greatest authority on Çrémad-
Bhägavatam. Thus being requested by Mahäräja Parékñit, Çukadeva 
Gosvämé continued to speak about the transcendental pastimes of Lord 
Kåñëa in the matter of His form, quality, fame and paraphernalia. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twelfth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“The Killing of the Aghäsura Demon.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
119
CHAPTER THIRTEEN 
The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by Brahmä 
 
Çukadeva Gosvämé was very much encouraged when Mahäräja Parékñit 
asked him why the cowherd boys did not discuss the death of Aghäsura 
until after one year had passed. He explained thus: “My dear King, you 
are making the subject matter of the transcendental pastimes of Kåñëa 
fresher by your inquisitiveness.” 
It is said that it is the nature of a devotee to constantly apply his mind, 
energy, words, ears, etc., in hearing and chanting about Kåñëa. This is 
called Kåñëa consciousness, and for one who is rapt in hearing and 
chanting about Kåñëa, the subject matter never becomes hackneyed or 
old. That is the significance of transcendental subject matter in contrast 
to material subject matter. Material subject matter becomes stale, and 
one cannot hear a certain subject for a long time; he wants change. But 
as far as transcendental subject matter is concerned, it is called nitya-
nava-naväyamäna. This means that one can go on chanting and hearing 
about the Lord and never feel tired but remain fresh and eager to hear 
more and more. 
It is the duty of the spiritual master to disclose all confidential subject 
matter to the inquisitive and sincere disciple. Thus Çukadeva Gosvämé 
began to explain why the killing of Aghäsura was not discussed until one 
year had passed. Çukadeva Gosvämé told the King, “Now hear of this 
secret with attention. After saving His friends from the mouth of 
Aghäsura and killing the demon, Lord Kåñëa brought His friends to the 
bank of the Yamunä and addressed them as follows: “My dear friends, 
just see how this spot is very nice for taking lunch and playing on the 
soft, sandy Yamunä bank. You can see how the lotus flowers in the water 
are beautifully blown and how they distribute their fragrance all around. 
The chirping of the birds along with cooing of the peacocks, surrounded 
by the whispering of the leaves in the trees, combine and present sound 
vibrations that echo one another. And this just enriches the beautiful 
scenery created by the trees here. Let us have our lunch in this spot 
because it is already late and we are feeling hungry. Let the calves 
remain near us, and let them drink water from the Yamunä. While we 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
120
engage in our lunch-taking, the calves may engage in eating the soft 
grasses that are in this spot.’” 
On hearing this proposal from Kåñëa, all the boys became very glad and 
said, “Certainly, let us all sit down here to take our lunch.” They then let 
loose the calves to eat the soft grass. Sitting down on the ground and 
keeping Kåñëa in the center, they began to open their lunch boxes 
brought from home. Lord Çré Kåñëa was seated in the center of the 
circle, and all the boys kept their faces toward Him. They ate and 
constantly enjoyed seeing the Lord face to face. Kåñëa appeared to be 
the whorl of a lotus flower, and the boys surrounding Him appeared to 
be its different petals. The boys collected flowers, leaves of flowers and 
the bark of trees and placed their lunch on them, as well as in their 
boxes, and thus they began to eat their lunch, keeping company with 
Kåñëa. While taking lunch, each boy began to manifest different kinds 
of relations with Kåñëa, and they enjoyed each other’s company with 
joking words. While Lord Kåñëa was thus enjoying lunch with His 
friends, His flute was pushed within the belt of His cloth on His right 
side, and His bugle and cane were pushed in on the left-hand side of His 
cloth. In his left palm He was holding a lump of food prepared with 
yogurt, butter, rice and pieces of fruit salad, which could be seen through 
His petallike finger-joints. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who 
accepts the results of all great sacrifices, was laughing and joking, 
enjoying lunch with His friends in Våndävana. And thus the scene was 
being observed by the demigods from heaven. As for the boys, they were 
simply enjoying transcendental bliss in the company of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. 
At that time, the calves that were pasturing nearby entered into the 
deep forest, allured by new grasses, and gradually went out of sight. 
When the boys saw that the calves were not nearby, they became afraid 
for their safety, and they immediately cried out, “Kåñëa!” Kåñëa is the 
killer of fear personified. Everyone is afraid of fear personified, but fear 
personified is afraid of Kåñëa. By crying out the word “Kåñëa,” the boys 
at once transcended the fearful situation. Out of His great affection, 
Kåñëa did not want His friends to give up their pleasing lunch 
engagement and go searching for the calves. He therefore said, “My dear 
friends, you need not interrupt your lunch. Go on enjoying. I am going 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
121
personally to find the calves.” Thus Lord Kåñëa, still carrying the lump 
of yogurt-and-rice preparation in His left hand, immediately started to 
search out the calves in the caves and bushes. He searched in the 
mountain holes and in the forests, but nowhere could He find them. 
At the time when Aghäsura was killed and the demigods were looking 
on the incident with great surprise, Brahmä, who was born of the lotus 
flower growing out of the navel of Viñëu, also came to see. He was 
surprised how a little boy like Kåñëa could act so wonderfully. Although 
he was informed that the little cowherd boy was the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, he wanted to see more of the Lord’s glorious 
pastimes, and thus he stole all the calves and cowherd boys and took 
them to a different place. Lord Kåñëa, therefore, in spite of searching for 
the calves, could not find them, and He even lost His boyfriends on the 
bank of the Yamunä, where they had been taking their lunch. In the 
form of a cowherd boy, Lord Kåñëa was very little in comparison to 
Brahmä, but because He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He 
could immediately understand that all the calves and boys had been 
stolen by Brahmä. Kåñëa thought, “Brahmä has taken away all the boys 
and calves. How can I alone return to Våndävana? The mothers will be 
aggrieved!” 
Therefore in order to satisfy the mothers of His friends as well as to 
convince Brahmä of the supremacy of the Personality of Godhead, He 
immediately expanded Himself as the cowherd boys and calves. In the 
Vedas it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead has already 
expanded Himself into so many living entities by His energy. Therefore 
it was not very difficult for Him to expand Himself again into so many 
boys and calves. He expanded Himself to become exactly like the boys, 
who were of all different features and facial and bodily construction, and 
who were different in their clothing and ornaments and in their 
behavior and personal activities. In other words, each person, being an 
individual soul, has entirely different tastes, activities and behavior. Yet 
Kåñëa exactly expanded Himself into all the different positions of the 
individual boys. He also became the calves, who were also of different 
sizes, colors, activities, etc. This was possible because everything is an 
expansion of Kåñëa’s energy. In the Viñëu Puräëa it is said, parasya 
brahmaëaù çaktiù. Whatever we actually see in the cosmic 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
122
manifestation—be it matter or the activities of the living entities—is 
simply an expansion of the energies of the Lord, as heat and light are the 
different expansions of fire. 
Thus expanding Himself as the boys and calves in their individual 
capacities, and surrounded by such expansions of Himself, Kåñëa entered 
the village of Våndävana. The residents had no knowledge of what had 
happened. After entering the village of Våndävana, all the calves 
entered their respective cowsheds, and the boys went to their respective 
mothers and homes. 
The mothers of the boys heard the vibration of their flutes before their 
entrance, and to receive them, they came out of their homes and 
embraced them. And out of maternal affection, milk was flowing from 
their breasts, and they allowed the boys to drink it. However, their 
offering was not exactly to their boys but to the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, who had expanded Himself into such boys. This was a chance 
for all the mothers of Våndävana to feed the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead with their own milk. Therefore not only did Lord Kåñëa give 
Yaçodä the chance to feed Him, but this time He gave the chance to all 
the elder gopés. 
All the boys dealt with their mothers as usual, and the mothers also, on 
the approach of evening, bathed their respective children, decorated 
them with tilaka and ornaments and gave them necessary food after the 
day’s labor. The cows also, who were away in the pasturing ground, 
returned in the evening and called their respective calves. The calves 
immediately came to their mothers, and the mothers began to lick the 
bodies of the calves. These relations between the cows and the gopés with 
their calves and boys remained unchanged, although actually the 
original calves and boys were not there. Actually the cows’ affection for 
their calves and the elder gopés’ affection for the boys causelessly 
increased. Their affection increased naturally, even though the calves 
and boys were not their offspring. Although the cows and elderly gopés 
of Våndävana had greater affection for Kåñëa than for their own 
offspring, after this incident their affection for their offspring increased 
unlimitedly, exactly as it did for Kåñëa. For one year continuously, Kåñëa 
Himself expanded as the calves and cowherd boys and was present in the 
pasturing ground. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
123
As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, Kåñëa’s expansion is situated in 
everyone’s heart as the Supersoul. Similarly, instead of expanding 
Himself as the Supersoul, He expanded Himself as a portion of calves 
and cowherd boys for one continuous year. 
One day, a few days before a year had passed, Kåñëa and Balaräma were 
maintaining the calves in the forest when They saw some cows grazing 
on the top of Govardhana Hill. The cows could see down into the valley 
where the calves were being taken care of by the boys. Suddenly, on 
sighting their calves, the cows began to run towards them. They leaped 
downhill with joined front and rear legs. The cows were so melted with 
affection for their calves that they did not care about the rough path 
from the top of Govardhana Hill down to the pasturing ground. They 
approached the calves with their milk bags full of milk, and they raised 
their tails upwards. When they were coming down the hill, their milk 
bags were pouring milk on the ground out of intense maternal affection 
for the calves, although they were not their own calves. These cows had 
their own calves, and the calves that were grazing beneath Govardhana 
Hill were larger; they were not expected to drink milk directly from the 
milk bag but were satisfied with the grass. Yet all the cows came 
immediately and began to lick their bodies, and the calves also began to 
suck milk from the milk bags. There appeared to be a great bondage of 
affection between the cows and calves. 
When the cows were running down from the top of Govardhana Hill, 
the men who were taking care of them tried to stop them. Older cows 
are taken care of by the men, and the calves are taken care of by the 
boys; and as far as possible, the calves are kept separate from the cows, so 
that the calves do not drink all the available milk. Therefore the men 
who were taking care of the cows on the top of Govardhana Hill tried to 
stop them, but they failed. Baffled by their failure, they were feeling 
ashamed and angry. They were very unhappy, but when they came down 
and saw their children taking care of the calves, they all of a sudden 
became very affectionate toward the children. It was very astonishing. 
Although the men came down disappointed, baffled and angry, as soon 
as they saw their own children, their hearts melted with great affection. 
At once their anger, dissatisfaction and unhappiness disappeared. They 
began to show paternal love for the children, and with great affection 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
124
they lifted them in their arms and embraced them. They began to smell 
their children’s heads and enjoy their company with great happiness. 
After embracing their children, the men took the cows back to the top 
of Govardhana Hill. Along the way they began to think of their 
children, and affectionate tears fell from their eyes. 
When Balaräma saw this extraordinary exchange of affection between 
the cows and their calves and between the fathers and their children—
when neither the calves nor the children needed so much care—He 
began to wonder why this extraordinary thing had happened. He was 
astonished to see all the residents of Våndävana so affectionate to their 
own children, exactly as they had been to Kåñëa. Similarly, the cows had 
grown affectionate to their calves—as much as to Kåñëa. Balaräma 
therefore concluded that the extraordinary show of affection was 
something mystical, either performed by the demigods or by some 
powerful man. Otherwise, how could this wonderful change take place? 
He concluded that this mystical change must have been caused by 
Kåñëa, whom Balaräma considered His worshipable Personality of 
Godhead. He thought, “It was arranged by Kåñëa, and even I could not 
check its mystic power.” Thus Balaräma understood that all those boys 
and calves were only expansions of Kåñëa. 
Balaräma inquired from Kåñëa about the actual situation. He said, “My 
dear Kåñëa, in the beginning I thought that all these calves and cowherd 
boys were either great sages and saintly persons or demigods, but at 
present it appears that they are actually Your expansions. They are all 
You; You Yourself are playing as the calves and boys. What is the 
mystery of this situation? Where have those other calves and boys gone? 
And why are You expanding Yourself as the calves and boys? Will You 
kindly tell Me what is the cause?” At the request of Balaräma, Kåñëa 
briefly explained the whole situation: how the calves and boys were 
stolen by Brahmä and how He was concealing the incident by expanding 
Himself so people would not know that the original calves and boys were 
missing. 
While Kåñëa and Balaräma were talking, Brahmä returned after a 
moment’s interval (according to the duration of his life). We have 
information of Lord Brahmä’s duration of life from the Bhagavad-gétä: 
1,000 times the duration of the four ages, or 1,000 x 4,320,000 years, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
125
constitute Brahmä’s twelve hours. Similarly, one moment of Brahmä is 
equal to one year of our solar calculation. After one moment of 
Brahmä’s calculation, Brahmä came back to see the fun caused by his 
stealing the boys and calves. But he was also afraid that he was playing 
with fire. Kåñëa was his master, and he had played mischief for fun by 
taking away His calves and boys. He was really anxious, so he did not 
stay away very long; he came back after a moment (of his calculation). 
He saw that all the boys and calves were playing with Kåñëa in the same 
way as when he had come upon them, although he was confident that he 
had taken them and made them lie down asleep under the spell of his 
mystic power. Brahmä began to think, “All the boys and calves were 
taken away by me, and I know they are still sleeping. How is it that a 
similar batch of boys and calves is playing with Kåñëa? Is it that they are 
not influenced by my mystic power? Have they been playing continually 
for one year with Kåñëa?” Brahmä tried to understand who they were 
and how they were uninfluenced by his mystic power, but he could not 
ascertain it. In other words, he himself came under the spell of his own 
mystic power. The influence of his mystic power appeared like snow in 
darkness or a glowworm in the daytime. During the night’s darkness, the 
glowworm can show some glittering power, and the snow piled up on the 
top of a hill or on the ground can shine during the daytime. But at night 
the snow has no silver glitter, nor does the glowworm have any 
illuminating power during the daytime. Similarly, when the small mystic 
power exhibited by Brahmä was before the mystic power of Kåñëa, it was 
just like snow at night or a glowworm during the day. When a man of 
small mystic power wants to show potency in the presence of greater 
mystic power, he diminishes his own influence; he does not increase it. 
Even such a great personality as Brahmä, when he wanted to show his 
mystic power before Kåñëa, became ludicrous. Brahmä was thus confused 
about his own mystic power. 
In order to convince Brahmä that all those calves and boys were not the 
original ones, the calves and boys who were playing with Kåñëa 
transformed into Viñëu forms. Actually, the original ones were sleeping 
under the spell of Brahmä’s mystic power, but the present ones, seen by 
Brahmä, were all immediate expansions of Kåñëa, or Viñëu. Viñëu is the 
expansion of Kåñëa, so the Viñëu forms appeared before Brahmä. All the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
126
Viñëu forms were of bluish color and dressed in yellow garments; all of 
Them had four hands decorated with club, disc, lotus flower and 
conchshell. On Their heads were glittering golden helmets inlaid with 
jewels; They were bedecked with pearls and earrings and garlanded with 
beautiful flowers. On Their chests was the mark of Çrévatsa, Their arms 
were decorated with armlets and other jewelry, and Their necks were 
just like conchshells. Their legs were decorated with bells, Their waists 
with golden belts, and Their fingers with jeweled rings. Brahmä also saw 
that upon the whole body of each Lord Viñëu, beginning from the lotus 
feet up to the top of the head, fresh tulasé leaves and buds had been 
thrown. Another significant feature of the Viñëu forms was that all of 
Them were looking transcendentally beautiful. Their smiling resembled 
the moonshine, and Their glancing resembled the early rising of the sun. 
Just by Their glancing They appeared to be the creators and maintainers 
of the modes of ignorance and passion. Viñëu represents the mode of 
goodness, Brahmä represents the mode of passion, and Lord Çiva 
represents the mode of ignorance. Therefore as the maintainer of 
everything in the cosmic manifestation, Viñëu is also the creator and 
maintainer of Brahmä and Lord Çiva. 
After this manifestation of Lord Viñëu, Brahmä saw that many other 
Brahmäs and Çivas and demigods and even insignificant living entities 
down to the ants and very small straws—movable and immovable living 
entities—were dancing, surrounding Lord Viñëu. Their dancing was 
accompanied by various kinds of music, and all of Them were worshiping 
Lord Viñëu. Brahmä realized that all those Viñëu forms were complete in 
mystic power, beginning from the aëimä perfection of becoming small 
like an atom up to becoming infinite like the cosmic manifestation. All 
the mystic powers of Brahmä, Çiva, all the demigods and the twenty-four 
elements of cosmic manifestation were fully represented in the person of 
Viñëu. By the influence of Lord Viñëu, all subordinate mystic powers 
were engaged in His worship. He was being worshiped by time, space, the 
cosmic manifestation, reformation, desire, activity and the three 
qualities of material nature. Lord Viñëu, Brahmä also realized, is the 
reservoir of all truth, knowledge and bliss. He is the combination of 
three transcendental features, namely eternity, knowledge and bliss, and 
He is the object of worship by the followers of the Upaniñads. Brahmä 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
127
realized that all the different forms of boys and calves transformed into 
Viñëu forms were not transformed by a mysticism of the type that a yogé 
or a demigod can display by specific powers invested in him. The calves 
and boys transformed into viñëu-mürtis, or Viñëu forms, were not 
displays of viñëu-mäyä, or Viñëu’s energy, but were Viñëu Himself. The 
respective qualifications of Viñëu and viñëu-mäyä are just like fire and 
heat. In the heat there is the qualification of fire, namely warmth; and 
yet heat is not fire. The manifestation of the Viñëu forms of the boys 
and calves was not like the heat but rather the fire—they were all 
actually Viñëu. Factually, the qualification of Viñëu is full truth, full 
knowledge and full bliss. Another example can be given with material 
objects, which are reflected in many, many forms. For example, the sun 
is reflected in many waterpots, but the reflections of the sun in the 
many pots are not actually the sun. There is no actual heat or light from 
the suns in the pots, although they appear like the sun. But the forms 
which Kåñëa assumed were each and every one full Viñëu. The specific 
word used in this connection is satya-jïänänantänanda: satya means 
truth; jïäna, full knowledge; ananta, unlimited; and änanda, full bliss. 
The transcendental forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are so 
great that the impersonalistic followers of the Upaniñads cannot reach 
the platform of knowledge to understand them. Indeed, the 
transcendental forms of the Lord are far beyond the reach of the 
impersonalists, who can only understand, through studying the 
Upaniñads, that the Absolute Truth is not matter, or is not materially 
restricted. From Kåñëa’s expansion into Viñëu forms, Lord Brahmä could 
understand by his limited potency that everything movable and 
immovable within the cosmic manifestation is existing due to the 
expansion of the energy of the Supreme Lord. 
When Brahmä was thus standing baffled in his limited power and 
conscious of his limited activities within the eleven senses, he could 
realize that he was also a creation of the material energy, just like a 
puppet. As a puppet has no independent power to dance but dances 
according to the direction of the puppet master, so the demigods and 
living entities are all subordinate to the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. As it is stated in the Caitanya-caritämåta, the only master is 
Kåñëa, and all others are servants. The whole world is under the waves 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
128
of the material spell, and beings are floating like straws in water. So 
their struggle for existence is continuing. But as soon as one becomes 
conscious that he is the eternal servant of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, this mäyä, or illusory struggle for existence, is immediately 
stopped. 
Lord Brahmä, who has full control over the goddess of learning and who 
is considered to be the best authority in Vedic knowledge, was thus 
perplexed, being unable to understand the extraordinary power 
manifested by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the mundane 
world, even a personality like Brahmä is unable to understand the mystic 
power of the Supreme Lord. Not only did Brahmä fail to understand, but 
he was perplexed even to see the display which was being manifested by 
Kåñëa before him. 
Kåñëa took compassion upon Brahmä, who was unable even to see how 
He was displaying the forms of Viñëu and transforming Himself into 
calves and cowherd boys, and thus, while fully manifesting the Viñëu 
expansions, He suddenly pulled His curtain of yogamäyä over the scene. 
In the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
is not visible due to the curtain spread by yogamäyä. That which covers 
the reality is mahä-mäyä, or the external energy, which does not allow a 
conditioned soul to understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
beyond the cosmic manifestation. But the energy which partially 
manifests the Supreme Personality of Godhead and partially does not 
allow one to see is called yogamäyä. Brahmä is not an ordinary 
conditioned soul. He is far, far superior to all the other demigods, and 
yet he could not comprehend the display of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead; therefore Kåñëa willingly stopped manifesting any further 
potency. The conditioned soul not only becomes bewildered but is 
completely unable to understand. The curtain of yogamäyä was drawn so 
that Brahmä would not become more and more perplexed. 
When Brahmä was relieved from his perplexity, he appeared to awaken 
from an almost dead state, and he began to open his eyes with great 
difficulty. Thus he could see the external cosmic manifestation with 
common eyes. He saw all around him the superexcellent view of 
Våndävana—full with trees—which is the source of life for all living 
entities. He could appreciate the transcendental land of Våndävana, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
129
where all the living entities are transcendental to ordinary nature. In 
the forest of Våndävana, even ferocious animals like tigers and others 
live peacefully along with the deer and human beings. He could 
understand that because of the presence of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Våndävana is transcendental to all other places and is free of 
lust and greed. 
Brahmä thus found Çré Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
playing the part of a small cowherd boy; he saw that little child with a 
lump of food in His left hand, searching out His friends and calves, just 
as He had actually been doing one year before, after their disappearance. 
Immediately Brahmä descended from his great swan carrier and fell 
down before the Lord just like a golden stick. The word used among the 
Vaiñëavas for offering respect is daëòavat. This word means “falling 
down like a stick”; one should offer respect to the superior Vaiñëava by 
falling down straight, with his body just like a stick. So Brahmä fell down 
before the Lord just like a stick to offer respect; and because the 
complexion of Brahmä is golden, he appeared to be like a golden stick 
lying down before Lord Kåñëa. All the four helmets on the heads of 
Brahmä touched the lotus feet of Kåñëa. Brahmä, being very joyful, 
began to shed tears, and he washed the lotus feet of Kåñëa with his tears. 
Repeatedly he fell and rose as he recalled the wonderful activities of the 
Lord. After repeating obeisances for a long time, Brahmä stood up and 
smeared his hands over his eyes. Seeing the Lord before him, he, 
trembling, began to offer prayers with great respect, humility and 
attention. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirteenth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by Brahmä.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
130
CHAPTER FOURTEEN 
Prayers Offered by Lord Brahmä to Lord Kåñëa 
 
Brahmä said, “My dear Lord, You are the only worshipful Supreme Lord, 
the Personality of Godhead; therefore I am offering my humble 
obeisances and prayers just to please You. Your bodily features are of the 
color of clouds filled with water. You are glittering with a silver electric 
aura emanating from Your yellow garments. 
“Let me offer my respectful repeated obeisances unto the son of 
Mahäräja Nanda, who is standing before me with conchshell earrings 
and a peacock feather on His head. His face is beautiful; He is wearing a 
helmet and is garlanded by forest flowers, and He stands with a morsel of 
food in His hand. He is decorated with a cane, a buffalo-horn bugle and 
a flute. He stands before me with small lotus feet. 
“My dear Lord, people may say that I am the master of all Vedic 
knowledge, and I am supposed to be the creator of this universe, but it 
has been proved now that I cannot understand You, who are present 
before me just like a child. You are playing with Your boyfriends and 
calves, which might imply that You do not even have sufficient 
education. You are appearing just like a village boy, carrying Your food 
in Your hand and searching for Your calves. And yet there is so much 
difference between Your body and mine that I cannot estimate the 
potency of Your body. As I have already stated in the Brahma-saàhitä, 
Your body is not material.” 
In the Brahma-saàhitä it is stated that the body of the Lord is all-
spiritual; there is no difference between the Lord’s body and His self. 
Each limb of His body can perform the actions of all the others. The 
Lord can see with His hands, He can hear with His eyes, He can accept 
offerings with His legs, and He can create with His mouth. 
Brahmä continued, “Your appearance as a cowherd child is for the 
benefit of the devotees, and although I have committed an offense at 
Your lotus feet by stealing away Your boys and calves, I can understand 
that You have bestowed Your mercy upon me. That is Your 
transcendental quality: You are very affectionate toward Your devotees. 
But in spite of Your great affection for me, I cannot estimate the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
131
potency of Your bodily activities. It is to be understood that when I, 
Lord Brahmä, the supreme personality of this universe, cannot estimate 
the childlike body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, then what to 
speak of others? And if I cannot estimate the spiritual potency of Your 
childlike body, then what can I understand about Your transcendental 
pastimes? Therefore, as it is said in the Bhagavad-gétä, anyone who can 
understand a little of the transcendental pastimes, appearance and 
disappearance of the Lord becomes immediately eligible to enter into the 
kingdom of God after quitting the material body. This statement is also 
confirmed in the Vedas, where it is stated: Simply by understanding the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can overcome the chain of 
repeated birth and death. I therefore recommend that people should not 
try to understand You by their speculative knowledge. 
“The best process of understanding You is to submissively give up the 
speculative process and try to hear about You, either from Yourself as 
You have given statements in the Bhagavad-gétä and many similar Vedic 
scriptures, or from a realized devotee who has taken shelter at Your lotus 
feet. One has to hear from a devotee without speculation. One does not 
even need to change his worldly position; he simply has to hear Your 
message. Although You are not understandable by the material senses, 
simply by hearing about You one can gradually conquer the nescience of 
misunderstanding. By Your own grace only, You become revealed to a 
devotee. You are unconquerable by any other means. Speculative 
knowledge without any trace of devotional service is simply a useless 
waste of time in the search for You. Devotional service is so important 
that even a little attempt can raise one to the highest perfectional 
platform. One should not, therefore, neglect this auspicious process of 
devotional service and take to the speculative method. By the 
speculative method one may gain partial knowledge of Your cosmic 
manifestation, but it is not possible to understand You, the origin of 
everything. The attempt of persons who are interested only in 
speculative knowledge is simply wasted labor, like the labor of a person 
who attempts to gain something by beating an empty husk of rice paddy. 
A little quantity of paddy can be husked by the grinding wheel, and one 
can gain some grains of rice, but if the skin of the paddy has already 
been beaten by the grinding wheel, there is no further gain in beating 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
132
even a huge quantity of the husk. It is simply useless labor. 
“My dear Lord, there are many instances in the history of human society 
where a person, after failing to achieve the transcendental platform, 
engaged himself in devotional service with his body, mind and words 
and thus attained the highest perfectional state of entering into Your 
abode. The processes of understanding You by speculation or mystic 
meditation are all useless without devotional service. One should 
therefore engage himself in Your devotional service even in his worldly 
activities, and one should always keep himself near You by the process of 
hearing and chanting Your transcendental glories. Simply by being 
attached to hearing and chanting Your glories, one can attain the 
highest perfectional stage of entering into Your kingdom. If a person, 
therefore, always keeps in touch with You by hearing and chanting Your 
glories and offers the results of his work for Your satisfaction only, he 
very easily and happily attains entrance into Your supreme abode. You 
are realizable by persons who have cleansed their hearts of all 
contamination. This cleansing of the heart is made possible by chanting 
and hearing the glories of Your Lordship.” 
The Lord is all-pervading. As it is stated by Lord Kåñëa in the Bhagavad-
gétä, “Everything is sustained by Me, but at the same time I am not in 
everything.” Since the Lord is all-pervading, there is nothing existing 
without His knowledge. The all-pervasive nature of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead can never be within the limited knowledge of a 
living entity; therefore, a person who has attained steadiness of the mind 
by fixing the mind on the lotus feet of the Lord is able to understand the 
Supreme Lord to some extent. It is the business of the mind to wander 
over varied subject matter for sense gratification. Therefore only a 
person who always engages the senses in the service of the Lord can 
control the mind and be fixed at the lotus feet of the Lord. This 
concentration of the mind upon the lotus feet of the Lord is called 
samädhi. Until one reaches the stage of samädhi, or trance, he cannot 
understand the nature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. There 
may be some philosophers or scientists who can study the cosmic nature 
from atom to atom; they may be so advanced that they can count the 
atomic composition of the cosmic atmosphere or all the planets and stars 
in the sky, or even the shining molecular parts of the sun or other stars 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
133
and luminaries in the sky. But it is not possible to count the qualities of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
As described in the beginning of the Vedänta-sütra, the Supreme Person 
is the origin of all qualities. He is generally called nirguëa. Nirguëa 
means “whose qualities are beyond estimation.” Guëa means “quality,” 
and nir means “beyond estimation.” But impersonalists interpret this 
word nirguëa as “having no quality.” Because they are unable to estimate 
the qualities of the Lord in transcendental realization, they conclude 
that the Supreme Lord has no qualities. But that is actually not the 
position. The real position is that He is the original source of all 
qualities. All qualities are emanating constantly from Him. How, 
therefore, can a limited person count the qualities of the Lord? One may 
estimate the qualities of the Lord for one moment, but the next moment 
the qualities are increased; so it is not possible to make an estimation of 
the transcendental qualities of the Lord. He is therefore called nirguëa, 
one whose qualities cannot be estimated. 
One should not uselessly labor in mental speculation to estimate the 
Lord’s qualities. There is no need of adopting the speculative method or 
exercising the body to attain mystic yoga perfection. One should simply 
understand that the distress and happiness of this body are predestined; 
there is no need to try to avoid the distress of this bodily existence or to 
attempt to achieve happiness by different types of exercises. The best 
course is to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead with 
body, mind and words and always be engaged in His service. This 
transcendental labor is fruitful, but other attempts to understand the 
Absolute Truth are never successful. Therefore an intelligent man does 
not try to understand the Absolute Truth by speculative or mystic 
power. Rather, he engages in devotional service and depends on the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He knows that whatever may happen 
to the body is due to his past fruitive activities. If one lives such a simple 
life in devotional service, then automatically he inherits the 
transcendental abode of the Lord. Actually, every living entity is part 
and parcel of the Supreme Lord and a son of the Godhead. Each has the 
natural right to inherit and share the transcendental pleasures of the 
Lord, but due to the contact of matter, conditioned living entities have 
been practically disinherited. If one adopts the simple method of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
134
engaging himself in devotional service, automatically he becomes 
eligible to be freed from material contamination and elevated to the 
transcendental position of associating with the Supreme Lord. 
Lord Brahmä presented himself to Lord Kåñëa as the most presumptuous 
living creature because he wanted to examine the wonder of His 
personal power. He stole the boys and calves of the Lord in order to see 
how the Lord would recover them. Now Lord Brahmä admitted that his 
attempt was most presumptuous, for he was attempting to test his energy 
before the person of original energy. Coming to his senses, Lord Brahmä 
saw that although he was a very powerful living creature in the 
estimation of all other living creatures within this material world, his 
power was nothing in comparison to the power and energy of the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The scientists of the material world 
have discovered wonders such as atomic weapons, and when tested in a 
city or some insignificant place on this planet, such powerful weapons 
create so-called havoc, but if the atomic weapons are tested on the sun, 
what is their significance? They are insignificant there. Similarly, 
Brahmä’s stealing of the calves and boys from Çré Kåñëa may be a 
wonderful display of mystic power, but when Çré Kåñëa exhibited His 
expansive power in so many calves and boys and maintained them 
without effort, Brahmä could understand that his own power was 
insignificant. 
Brahmä addressed Lord Kåñëa as Acyuta because the Lord is never 
forgetful of a little service rendered by His devotee. He is so kind and 
affectionate towards His devotees that a little service by them is 
accepted by Him as a great deal. Brahmä has certainly rendered much 
service to the Lord. As the supreme personality in charge of this 
particular universe, he is, without a doubt, a faithful servant of Kåñëa; 
therefore he could appease Kåñëa. He asked that the Lord understand 
him as a subordinate servant whose little mistake and impudence might 
be excused. He admitted that he was puffed up by his powerful position 
as Lord Brahmä. Because he is the qualitative incarnation of the mode of 
passion within this material world, this was natural for him, and 
therefore he committed the mistake. But Lord Brahmä hoped that since 
he was, after all, Lord Kåñëa’s subordinate, the Lord would kindly take 
compassion upon him and excuse him for his gross mistake. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
135
Lord Brahmä realized his actual position. He is certainly the supreme 
teacher of this universe, in charge of the production of material nature, 
consisting of the complete material energy, false ego, sky, air, fire, water 
and earth. Such a universe may be gigantic, but it can be measured, just 
as we measure our body as seven spans. Generally everyone’s personal 
bodily measurement is calculated to be seven spans of his hand. This 
particular universe may appear as a very gigantic body, but it is nothing 
but the measurement of seven spans for Lord Brahmä. Aside from this 
universe, there are unlimited other universes which are outside the 
jurisdiction of this particular Lord Brahmä. Just as innumerable atomic 
infinitesimal fragments pass through the holes of a screened window, so 
millions and trillions of universes in their seedling form are coming out 
from the bodily pores of Mahä-Viñëu, and that Mahä-Viñëu is but a part 
of a part of the plenary expansion of Kåñëa. Under these circumstances, 
although Lord Brahmä is the supreme creature within this universe, 
what is his importance in the presence of Lord Kåñëa? 
Lord Brahmä therefore compared himself to a little child within the 
womb of his mother. If the child within the womb plays with his hands 
and legs, and while playing touches the body of the mother, is the 
mother offended with the child? Of course she isn’t. Similarly, Lord 
Brahmä may be a very great personality, and yet not only Brahmä but 
everything that be is existing within the womb of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. The Lord’s energy is all-pervading: there is no 
place in the creation where it is not acting. Since everything is existing 
within the energy of the Lord, the Brahmä of this universe and the 
Brahmäs of the many other millions and trillions of universes are 
existing within the energy of the Lord; therefore the Lord is considered 
to be the mother, and everything existing within the womb of the 
mother is considered to be the child. And the good mother is never 
offended with the child, even if he touches the body of the mother by 
kicking his legs. 
Lord Brahmä then said that his birth was from the lotus flower which 
blossomed from the navel of Näräyaëa after the dissolution of the three 
worlds, or three planetary systems, known as Bhürloka, Bhuvarloka and 
Svarloka. The universe is divided into three divisions, namely Svarga, 
Martya and Pätäla. These three planetary systems are merged into water 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
136
at the time of dissolution. At that time Näräyaëa, the plenary portion of 
Kåñëa, lies down on the water, and gradually a lotus stem grows from His 
navel, and from that lotus flower, Brahmä is born. It is naturally 
concluded that the mother of Brahmä is Näräyaëa. Because the Lord is 
the resting place of all the living entities after the dissolution of the 
universe, He is called Näräyaëa. The word nära means the aggregate 
total of all living entities, and ayana means the resting place. The form 
of Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu is called Näräyaëa because He rests Himself on 
that water. In addition, He is the resting place of all living creatures. 
Besides that, Näräyaëa is also present in everyone’s heart, as confirmed 
in the Bhagavad-gétä. In that sense, also, He is Näräyaëa, as ayana means 
the source of knowledge as well as the resting place. It is also confirmed 
in the Bhagavad-gétä that the remembrance of the living entity is due to 
the presence of the Supersoul within the heart. After changing the 
body, a living creature forgets everything of his past life, but because 
Näräyaëa, the Supersoul, is present within his heart, he is reminded by 
Him to act according to his past desire. Lord Brahmä wanted to prove 
that Kåñëa is the original Näräyaëa, that He is the source of Näräyaëa, 
and that Näräyaëa is not an exhibition of the external energy, mäyä, but 
is an expansion of spiritual energy. The activities of the external energy, 
or mäyä, are exhibited after the creation of this cosmic world, and the 
original spiritual energy of Näräyaëa was acting before the creation. So 
the expansions of Näräyaëa—from Näräyaëa to Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu, 
from Käraëodakaçäyé Viñëu to Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu, from 
Garbhodakaçäyé Viñëu to Kñérodakaçäyé Viñëu, and from Kñérodakaçäyé 
Viñëu to everyone’s heart—are actually Kåñëa’s expansions, 
manifestations of His spiritual energy. They are not conducted by the 
material energy; therefore they are not temporary. Anything conducted 
by the material energy is temporary, but everything executed by the 
spiritual energy is eternal. 
Lord Brahmä reconfirmed his statement establishing Lord Kåñëa as the 
original Näräyaëa. He said that the Lord’s gigantic universal form is 
resting on the water known as Garbhodaka. He spoke as follows: “This 
gigantic universal form is another manifestation of Your energy. On 
account of His resting on the water, this universal form is also Näräyaëa, 
and we are all within the womb of this Näräyaëa form. I see Your 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
137
different Näräyaëa forms everywhere. I can see You on the water, I can 
feel You within my heart, and I can also see You before me now. You are 
the original Näräyaëa. 
“My dear Lord, in this incarnation You have proved that You are the 
supreme controller of mäyä. You remain within the cosmic 
manifestation, and yet the whole creation is within You. This fact has 
already been proved by You when You exhibited the whole universal 
creation within Your mouth before Your mother Yaçodä. By Your 
inconceivable potency of yogamäyä, You can make such things effective 
without external help. 
“My dear Lord Kåñëa, the whole cosmic manifestation that we are 
visualizing at present is all within Your body. Yet I am seeing You 
outside, and You are also seeing me outside. How can such things 
happen without being influenced by Your inconceivable energy?” 
Lord Brahmä stressed herein that without accepting the inconceivable 
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one cannot explain 
things as they are. He continued, “My dear Lord, leaving aside all other 
things and just considering today’s happenings—what I have seen—are 
they not all due to Your inconceivable energies? First of all I saw You 
alone; thereafter You expanded Yourself as Your cowherd boyfriends, 
the calves and all the existence of Våndävana; then I saw You and all 
the boys and calves as four-handed Viñëus, and They were being 
worshiped by all elements and all demigods, including myself. Again 
They were all wound up, and You remained alone as You were before. 
Does this not mean that You are the Supreme Lord Näräyaëa, the origin 
of everything, that everything emanates from You and again enters into 
You, leaving You the same as before? 
“Persons who are unaware of Your inconceivable energy cannot 
understand that You alone expand Yourself as the creator (Brahmä), the 
maintainer (Viñëu) and the annihilator (Çiva). Persons who are not in 
awareness of things as they are contemplate that I, Brahmä, am the 
creator, Viñëu is the maintainer, and Lord Çiva is the annihilator. 
Actually, You alone are everything—creator, maintainer and 
annihilator. Similarly, You expand Yourself in different incarnations: 
among the demigods You incarnate as Vämanadeva, among the great 
sages You incarnate as Paraçuräma, among the human beings You appear 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
138
as Yourself, Lord Kåñëa, or as Lord Räma, among the animals You appear 
as the boar incarnation, and among the aquatics You appear as the fish 
incarnation. And yet You have no appearance or disappearance: You are 
always eternal. Your appearance and disappearance are made possible by 
Your inconceivable energy just to give protection to the faithful 
devotees and to annihilate the faithless demons. O my Lord, O all-
pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, O Supersoul, controller of 
all mystic powers, no one can appreciate Your transcendental pastimes 
as they are exhibited within these three worlds. No one can estimate 
how You have expanded Your yogamäyä and Your incarnations and how 
You act by Your transcendental energy. My dear Lord, this whole cosmic 
manifestation is just like a flashing dream, and its temporary existence 
simply disturbs the mind. As a result, we are full of anxiety in this 
existence; to live within this material world means simply to suffer and 
to be full of all miseries. And yet this temporary existence of the 
material world appears to be pleasing and dear on account of its having 
evolved from Your body, which is eternal and full of bliss and 
knowledge. 
“My conclusion is, therefore, that You are the Supreme Soul, the 
Absolute Truth, and the supreme original person; and although by Your 
inconceivable transcendental potencies You have expanded Yourself in 
so many Viñëu forms, and also in the living entities and other energies, 
You are the supreme one without a second, the supreme Supersoul. The 
innumerable living entities are simply like sparks of the original fire, 
Your Lordship. The conception of the Supersoul as impersonal is 
wrongly accepted because I see that You are the original person. Persons 
with a poor fund of knowledge may think that because You are the son 
of Mahäräja Nanda You are not the original person, that You are born 
just like a human being. They are mistaken. You are the actual original 
person; that is my conclusion. In spite of Your being the son of Nanda, 
You are the original person, and there is no doubt about it. You are the 
Absolute Truth, and You are not of this material darkness. You are the 
source of the original brahmajyoti as well as the material luminaries—
the sun, moon and stars. Your transcendental effulgence is identical 
with the brahmajyoti. As it is described in the Brahma-saàhitä, the 
brahmajyoti is nothing but Your personal bodily effulgence. There are 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
139
many Viñëu incarnations and incarnations of Your different qualities, 
but all those incarnations are not on the same level. You are the original 
lamp. Other incarnations may possess the same candlepower as the 
original lamp, but the original lamp is the beginning of all light. And 
because You are not one of the creations of this material world, even 
after the annihilation of this world, Your existence as You are will 
continue. 
“Because You are the original person, You are described in the Gopäla-
täpané Upaniñad, as well as in the Brahma-saàhitä, as govindam ädi-
puruñam. Govinda is the original person, the cause of all causes. In the 
Bhagavad-gétä also it is stated that You are the source of the Brahman 
effulgence. No one should conclude that Your body is like an ordinary 
material body. Your body is akñara, indestructible. The material body is 
always full of threefold miseries, but Your body is sac-cid-änanda-
vigraha: [Bs. 5.1] full of bliss, knowledge and eternality. You are also 
niraïjana because Your pastimes, as the little son of mother Yaçodä or 
the lover of the gopés, are never contaminated by the material qualities. 
And although You exhibited Yourself as so many cowherd boys and 
calves, Your transcendental potency was not reduced. You are always 
complete. As it is described in the Vedic literature, even if the complete 
is taken away from the complete—the Supreme Absolute Truth—it 
remains the complete Supreme Absolute Truth. And although many 
expansions from the complete are visible, the complete is one without a 
second. Since all Your pastimes are spiritual, there is no possibility of 
their being contaminated by the material modes of nature. When You 
place Yourself as subordinate to Your father and mother, Nanda and 
Yaçodä, You are not reduced in Your potency; this is an expression of 
Your loving attitude for Your devotees. There is no second identity to 
compete with You. A person with a poor fund of knowledge concludes 
that Your appearance and pastimes are simply material designations. 
You are transcendental to both nescience and knowledge, as it is 
confirmed in the Gopäla-täpané Upaniñad. You are the original amåta 
(indestructible nectar of immortality). As confirmed in the Vedas, 
amåtaà çäçvataà brahma. Brahman is the eternal, the supreme origin of 
everything, who has no birth or death. 
“In the Upaniñads it is stated that the Supreme Brahman is as effulgent 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
140
as the sun and is the origin of everything, and anyone who can 
understand that original person becomes liberated from the material, 
conditioned life. Anyone who can simply be attached to You by 
devotional service can know Your actual position, birth, appearance, 
disappearance and activities. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä, simply 
by understanding Your constitutional position, appearance and 
disappearance, one can be immediately elevated to the spiritual kingdom 
after quitting this present body. Therefore to cross over the ocean of 
material nescience, an intelligent person takes shelter of Your lotus feet 
and is easily transferred to the spiritual world. 
“There are many so-called meditators who do not know that You are the 
Supreme Soul. As stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, You are the Supreme Soul 
present in everyone’s heart. Therefore there is no necessity of one’s 
meditating on something beyond You. One who is always absorbed in 
meditation on Your original form of Kåñëa easily crosses over the ocean 
of material nescience. But persons who do not know that You are the 
Supreme Soul remain within this material world in spite of their so-
called meditation. If, by the association of Your devotees, a person comes 
to the knowledge that Lord Kåñëa is the original Supersoul, then it is 
possible for him to cross over the ocean of material ignorance. For 
instance, when a person mistakes a rope for a snake he is filled with fear, 
but as soon as he understands that the rope is not a snake, he is liberated 
from fear. If one understands You, therefore, through Your personal 
teachings, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, or through Your pure devotees, 
as stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam and all other Vedic scriptures—if one 
realizes that You are the ultimate goal of understanding—he need no 
more fear this material existence. 
“So-called liberation and bondage have no meaning for a person who is 
already engaged in Your devotional service, just as a rope is not fearful 
to a person who knows that it is not a snake. A devotee knows that this 
material world belongs to You, and he therefore engages everything in 
Your transcendental loving service. Thus there is no bondage for him. 
For a person who is already situated in the sun planet, there is no 
question of the appearance or disappearance of the sun in the name of 
day or night. It is also said that You, Kåñëa, are just like the sun, and that 
mäyä is like darkness. When the sun is present, there is no question of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
141
darkness; so, for those who always remain in Your presence by engaging 
in Your service, there is no question of bondage or liberation. They are 
already liberated. On the other hand, persons who falsely think 
themselves to be liberated without taking shelter of Your lotus feet fall 
down because their intelligence is not pure. 
“If one therefore thinks that the Supersoul is something different from 
Your personality and thus searches out the Supersoul or the Supreme 
Brahman somewhere else, in the forest or in the caves of the Himälayas, 
his condition is very lamentable. Your teachings in the Bhagavad-gétä 
are that one should give up all other processes of self-realization and 
simply surrender unto You, for that is complete. Because You are the 
Supreme in every respect, those who are searching after the Brahman 
effulgence are also searching after You. And those who are searching 
after Supersoul realization are also searching after You. You state in the 
Bhagavad-gétä that You Yourself, by Your partial representation as the 
Supersoul, have entered into this material cosmic manifestation. You are 
present in everyone’s heart, and there is no need to search out the 
Supersoul anywhere else. If someone does so, he is simply in ignorance. 
One who is transcendental to such a position understands that You are 
unlimited; You are both within and without. Therefore Your presence is 
everywhere. Instead of searching for the Supersoul anywhere else, a 
devotee only concentrates his mind on You within. Actually, one who is 
liberated from the material concept of life can search for You; others 
cannot. The analogy of thinking the rope to be a snake is applicable only 
to those who are still in ignorance of You. Actually, when one mistakes a 
rope for a snake, the existence of the snake is only within the mind. The 
existence of mäyä, similarly, is only within the mind. Mäyä is nothing 
but ignorance of Your personality. When one forgets Your personality, 
that is the conditioned state of mäyä. Therefore one who is fixed upon 
You both internally and externally is not illusioned. 
“One who has attained a little result of devotional service can 
understand Your glories. Even one striving for Brahman realization or 
Paramätmä realization cannot understand these features of Your 
personality unless You bestow on him the result of at least a slight bit of 
devotional service. One may be the spiritual master of many 
impersonalists, or he may go to the forest or to a mountain cave and 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
142
meditate as a hermit for many, many years, but he cannot understand 
Your glories without being favored by a slight degree of devotional 
service. Brahman realization or Paramätmä realization are also not 
possible even after one searches for many, many years unless one is 
touched by the wonderful effect of devotional service. 
“Therefore, my dear Lord, I pray that I may be so fortunate that in this 
life or in another life, wherever I may take my birth, I may be counted as 
one of Your devotees. Wherever I may be, I pray that I may be engaged 
in Your devotional service. I do not even care what form of life I get in 
the future, because I can see that even in the form of cows and calves or 
cowherd boys, the devotees are so fortunate to be always engaged in 
Your transcendental loving service and association. Therefore I wish to 
be one of them instead of such an exalted person as I am now, for I am 
full of ignorance. The gopés and cows of Våndävana are so fortunate that 
they have been able to supply their breast milk to You. Persons who are 
engaged in performing great sacrifices and offering many valuable goats 
in sacrifice cannot attain the perfection of understanding You, but 
simply by devotional service these innocent village women and cows are 
all able to satisfy You with their milk. You have drunk their milk to 
satisfaction, yet You are never satisfied as much by those engaged in 
performing sacrifices. I am simply surprised, therefore, with the 
fortunate position of Mahäräja Nanda, mother Yaçodä and the cowherd 
men and gopés, because You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
Absolute Truth, are existing here as their most intimate lovable object. 
My dear Lord, no one can actually appreciate the good fortune of these 
residents of Våndävana. We are all demigods, controlling deities of the 
various senses of the living entities, and we are proud of enjoying such 
privileges, but actually there is no comparison between our position and 
the position of these fortunate residents of Våndävana because they are 
actually relishing Your presence and enjoying Your association by dint 
of their sensory activities. We may be proud of being controllers of the 
senses, but here the residents of Våndävana are so transcendental that 
they are not under our control. Actually they are enjoying their senses 
through service to You. I shall therefore consider myself fortunate to be 
given a chance to take birth in this land of Våndävana in any of my 
future lives. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
143
“My dear Lord, I am therefore not interested in either material 
opulences or liberation. I am most humbly praying at Your lotus feet for 
You to please give me any sort of birth within this Våndävana forest so 
that I may be able to be favored by the dust of the feet of some of the 
devotees of Våndävana. If I am given the chance to grow as a humble 
blade of grass in this land, that would be a glorious birth for me. But if I 
am not so fortunate to take birth within the forest of Våndävana, I beg 
to be allowed to take birth outside the immediate area of Våndävana so 
that when the devotees go out they will walk over me. Even that would 
be a great fortune for me. I am just aspiring for a birth in which I will be 
smeared by the dust of the devotees’ feet, because I can see that 
everyone here is simply full of Kåñëa consciousness. No one here knows 
anything but the lotus feet of Kåñëa, or Mukunda, for which the Vedas 
themselves are searching.” 
It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä that the purpose of Vedic 
knowledge is to find Kåñëa. And it is said in the Brahma-saàhitä that it 
is very difficult to find Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by 
systematic reading of the Vedic literature. But He is very easily available 
through the mercy of a pure devotee. The pure devotees of Våndävana 
are fortunate because they can see Mukunda (Lord Kåñëa) all the time. 
This word mukunda can be understood in two ways. Muk means 
liberation. Lord Kåñëa can give liberation and therefore transcendental 
bliss. The word also refers to His smiling face, which is just like the 
kunda flower. Mukha means “face.” The kunda flower is very beautiful, 
and it appears to be smiling. Thus the comparison is made. 
The difference between the pure devotees of Våndävana and devotees in 
other places is that the residents of Våndävana have no other desire but 
to be associated with Kåñëa. Kåñëa, being very kind to His devotees, 
fulfills their desire; because they always want Kåñëa’s association, the 
Lord is always prepared to give it to them. The devotees of Våndävana 
are also spontaneous lovers. They are not required to strictly follow 
regulative principles because they are already naturally developed in 
transcendental love for Kåñëa. Regulative principles are required for 
persons who have not achieved such a position of spontaneous love. 
Brahmä is also a devotee of the Lord, but he is an ordinary devotee 
subject to following regulative principles. He prays to Kåñëa to give him 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
144
the chance to take birth in Våndävana so that he might be elevated to 
the platform of spontaneous love. 
Lord Brahmä continued, “My Lord, sometimes I am puzzled as to how 
Your Lordship will be able to repay, in gratitude, the devotional service 
of these residents of Våndävana. Although I know that You are the 
supreme source of all benediction, I am puzzled to know how You will be 
able to repay all the service that You are receiving from these residents 
of Våndävana. I think of how You are so kind, so magnanimous, that 
even Pütanä, who came to cheat You by dressing herself as a very 
affectionate mother, was awarded liberation and the actual post of a 
mother. And other demons belonging to the same family, such as 
Aghäsura and Bakäsura, were also favored with liberation and achieved 
You. Under the circumstances, I am puzzled. These residents of 
Våndävana have given You everything—their bodies, their minds, their 
love, their homes, their possessions. Everything is being utilized for Your 
purpose. So how will You be able to repay Your debt to them? You have 
already given Yourself to Pütanä! I surmise that You shall ever remain a 
debtor to the residents of Våndävana, being unable to repay their loving 
service. My Lord, I can understand that the superexcellent quality of the 
service rendered by the residents of Våndävana is due to their 
spontaneously engaging all natural instincts in Your loving service. It is 
said that attachment for material objects and home is due to illusion, 
which makes a living entity conditioned in the material world. But this 
is only the case for persons who are not Kåñëa conscious. In the case of 
the residents of Våndävana, such obstructions as attachment to hearth 
and home are nonexistent. Because their attachment has been directed 
unto You and their homes have been converted into temples by Your 
constant presence there, and because they have forgotten everything for 
Your sake, there is no impediment. For a Kåñëa conscious person, there 
is no such thing as impediments due to attachment for hearth and home. 
Nor is there illusion. 
“I can also understand that Your appearance as a small cowherd boy, a 
child of the cowherd men, is not at all a material activity. You are so 
much obliged by their affection that You are here to inspire them with 
more loving service by Your transcendental presence. In Våndävana 
there is no distinction between material and spiritual because 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
145
everything is dedicated to Your loving service. My dear Lord, Your 
Våndävana pastimes are simply to inspire Your devotees. If someone 
takes Your Våndävana pastimes to be material, he will be misled. 
“My dear Lord Kåñëa, those who deride You, claiming that You have a 
material body like an ordinary man, are described in the Bhagavad-gétä 
as demoniac and less intelligent. You are always transcendental. The 
nondevotees are cheated because they consider You to be a material 
creation. Actually, You have assumed this body, which exactly resembles 
that of an ordinary cowherd boy, simply to increase the devotion and 
transcendental bliss of Your devotees. 
“My dear Lord, I have nothing to say about people who advertise that 
they have already realized God or that by their realization they have 
themselves become God. But as far as I am concerned, I admit frankly 
that for me it is not possible to realize You by my body, mind or speech. 
What can I say about You, or how can I realize You by my senses? I 
cannot even think of You perfectly with my mind, which is the master 
of the senses. Your qualities, Your activities and Your body cannot be 
conceived of by any person within this material world. Only by Your 
mercy can one understand, to some extent, what You are. My dear Lord, 
You are the Supreme Lord of all creation, although I sometimes falsely 
think that I am the master of this universe. I may be the master of this 
universe, but there are innumerable universes, and there are 
innumerable Brahmäs also who preside over these universes. But 
actually You are the master of them all. As the Supersoul in everyone’s 
heart, You know everything. Please, therefore, accept me as Your 
surrendered servant. I hope that You will excuse me for committing the 
great offense of disturbing You in Your pastimes with Your friends and 
calves. Now if You will kindly allow me, I will immediately leave so You 
can enjoy Your friends and calves without my presence. 
“My dear Lord Kåñëa, Your very name suggests that You are all-
attractive. The attraction of the sun and the moon are all due to You. By 
the attraction of the sun, You are beautifying the very existence of the 
Yadu dynasty. With the attraction of the moon, You are enhancing the 
potency of the land, the demigods, the brähmaëas, the cows and the 
oceans. Because of Your supreme attraction, demons like Kaàsa and 
others are annihilated. Therefore it is my deliberate conclusion that You 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
146
are the only worshipable Deity within the creation. Accept my humble 
obeisances until the annihilation of this material world. As long as there 
is sunshine within this material world, kindly accept my humble 
obeisances.” 
In this way, Brahmä, the master of this universe, after offering humble 
and respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead and 
circumambulating Him three times, was ready to return to his abode, 
known as Brahmaloka. By His gesture, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead gave him permission to return. 
As soon as Brahmä left, Lord Çré Kåñëa immediately returned to the 
bank of the Yamunä and rejoined His calves and cowherd boyfriends, 
who were situated just as they had been on the very day they had 
vanished. Kåñëa had left His friends on the bank of the Yamunä while 
they were engaged in lunch, and although He returned exactly one year 
later, the cowherd boys thought that He had returned within a second. 
That is the way Kåñëa’s different energies act. It is stated in the 
Bhagavad-gétä that Kåñëa Himself is residing in everyone’s heart, and He 
causes both remembrance and forgetfulness. All living entities are 
controlled by the supreme energy of the Lord, and sometimes they 
remember and sometimes they forget their constitutional position. His 
friends, being controlled in such a way, could not understand that for 
one whole year they were absent from the Yamunä’s bank and were 
under the spell of Brahmä’s illusion. When Kåñëa appeared before the 
boys, they thought, “Kåñëa has returned within a minute.” They began 
to laugh, thinking that Kåñëa was not willing to leave their lunchtime 
company. They were very jubilant and invited Him, “Dear friend Kåñëa, 
You have come back so quickly! All right, we have not as yet begun our 
lunch, not even taken one morsel of food. So please come and join us, 
and let us eat together.” Kåñëa smiled and accepted their invitation, and 
He began to enjoy the lunchtime company of His friends. While eating, 
Kåñëa was thinking, “These boys believe that I have come back within a 
second, but they do not know that for the last year I have been involved 
with the mystic activities of Lord Brahmä.” 
After finishing their lunch, Kåñëa and His friends and calves began to 
return to their Vrajabhümi homes. While passing, they enjoyed seeing 
the dead carcass of Aghäsura in the shape of a gigantic serpent. When 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
147
Kåñëa returned home to Vrajabhümi, He was seen by all the inhabitants 
of Våndävana. He was wearing a peacock feather in His helmet, which 
was also decorated with forest flowers. Kåñëa was also garlanded with 
flowers and painted with different colored minerals collected from the 
caves of Govardhana Hill. Govardhana Hill is always famous for 
supplying natural red oxides, and Kåñëa and His friends painted their 
bodies with them. Each of them had a bugle made of buffalo horn and a 
stick and a flute, and each called his respective calves by their particular 
names. They were so proud of Kåñëa’s wonderful activities that, while 
entering the village, they all sang His glories. All the gopés in Våndävana 
saw beautiful Kåñëa entering the village. The boys composed nice songs 
describing how they were saved from being swallowed by the great 
serpent and how the serpent was killed. Some described Kåñëa as the son 
of Yaçodä, and others as the son of Nanda Mahäräja. “He is so wonderful 
that He saved us from the clutches of the great serpent and killed him,” 
they said. But little did they know that one year had passed since the 
killing of Aghäsura. 
In this regard, Mahäräja Parékñit asked Çukadeva Gosvämé how the 
inhabitants of Våndävana suddenly developed so much love for Kåñëa, 
although Kåñëa was not a member of any of their families. Mahäräja 
Parékñit inquired, “During the absence of the original cowherd boys, 
when Kåñëa expanded Himself, why is it that the boys’ parents became 
more loving toward Him than toward their own sons? Also, why did the 
cows become so loving toward the calves, more than toward their own 
calves?” 
Çukadeva Gosvämé told Mahäräja Parékñit that every living entity is 
actually most attached to his own self. Outward paraphernalia such as 
home, family, friends, country, society, wealth, opulence and reputation 
are all only secondary in pleasing the living entity. They please only 
because they bring pleasure to the self. For this reason, one is self-
centered and is attached to his body and self more than he is to relatives 
like wife, children and friends. If there is some immediate danger to 
one’s own person, he first of all takes care of himself, then others. That 
is natural. That means he loves his own self more than anything else. 
The next important object of affection, after his own self, is his material 
body. A person who has no information of the spirit soul is very much 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
148
attached to his material body, so much so that even in old age he wants 
to preserve the body in so many artificial ways, thinking that his old and 
broken body can be saved. Everyone is working hard day and night just 
to give pleasure to his own self, under either the bodily or spiritual 
concept of life. We are attached to material possessions because they 
give pleasure to the senses or to the body. The attachment to the body is 
there only because the “I,” the spirit soul, is within the body. Similarly, 
when one is further advanced, he knows that the spirit soul is pleasing 
because it is part and parcel of Kåñëa. Ultimately, it is Kåñëa who is 
pleasing and all-attractive. He is the Supersoul of everything. And in 
order to give us this information, Kåñëa descends and tells us that the 
all-attractive center is He Himself. Without being an expansion of 
Kåñëa, nothing can be attractive. 
Whatever is attractive within the cosmic manifestation is due to Kåñëa. 
Kåñëa is therefore the reservoir of all pleasure. The active principle of 
everything is Kåñëa, and highly elevated transcendentalists see 
everything in connection with Him. In the Caitanya-caritämåta it is 
stated that a mahä-bhägavata, or highly advanced devotee, sees Kåñëa as 
the active principle in all movable and immovable living entities. 
Therefore he sees everything within this cosmic manifestation in 
relation to Kåñëa. For the fortunate person who has taken shelter of 
Kåñëa as everything, liberation is already there. He is no longer in the 
material world. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä: Whoever is 
engaged in the devotional service of Kåñëa is already on the brahma-
bhüta or spiritual platform. The very name Kåñëa suggests piety and 
liberation. Anyone who takes shelter of the lotus feet of Kåñëa enters 
the boat for crossing over the ocean of nescience. For him, this vast 
expansion of the material manifestation becomes as insignificant as the 
water in a hoofprint. Kåñëa is the shelter of all great souls, and He is also 
the shelter of the material worlds. For one who is on the platform of 
Kåñëa consciousness, Vaikuëöha, or the spiritual world, is not far away. 
He does not live within the material world, where there is danger at 
every step. 
In this way, Kåñëa consciousness was fully explained by Çukadeva 
Gosvämé to Mahäräja Parékñit. Çukadeva Gosvämé even recited to the 
King the statements and prayers of Lord Brahmä. These descriptions of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
149
Lord Kåñëa’s pastimes with His cowherd boys, His eating with them on 
the bank of the Yamunä and Lord Brahma’s prayers unto Him, are all 
transcendental subject matters. Anyone who hears, recites or chants 
them surely gets all his spiritual desires fulfilled. Thus Kåñëa’s childhood 
appearance, His sporting with Balaräma in Våndävana, was described. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Fourteenth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Prayers Offered by Lord Brahmä to Lord Kåñëa.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
150
CHAPTER FIFTEEN 
The Killing of Dhenukäsura 
 
Thus Çré Kåñëa, along with His elder brother Balaräma, passed the 
childhood age known as kaumära and stepped into the age of paugaëòa, 
from the sixth year up to the tenth. At that time, all the cowherd men 
conferred and agreed to give those boys who had passed their fifth year 
charge of the cows in the pasturing ground. Given charge of the cows, 
Kåñëa and Balaräma traversed Våndävana, purifying the land with Their 
lotus footprints. 
Accompanied by the cowherd boys and Balaräma, Kåñëa brought 
forward the cows and played on His flute as He entered the forest of 
Våndävana, which was full of flowers, vegetables, and pasturing grass. 
The Våndävana forest was as sanctified as the clear mind of a devotee 
and was full of bees, flowers and fruits. There were chirping birds and 
clear-water lakes with waters that could relieve one of all fatigue. Sweet-
smelling breezes blew always, refreshing the mind and body. Kåñëa, with 
His friends and Balaräma, entered the forest and, seeing the favorable 
situation, desired to enjoy the atmosphere to the fullest extent. Kåñëa 
saw all the trees, overloaded with fruits and fresh twigs, bending down to 
touch the ground as if welcoming Him by touching His lotus feet. He 
was very pleased by the behavior of the trees, fruits and flowers, and He 
began to smile, realizing their desires. 
Kåñëa then spoke to His elder brother Balaräma as follows: “My dear 
brother, You are superior to all of us, and Your lotus feet are worshiped 
by the demigods. Just see how these trees, full with fruits and flowers, 
have bent down to worship Your lotus feet. It appears that they are 
trying to get out of the darkness that has obliged them to accept the 
form of trees. Actually, the trees born in the land of Våndävana are not 
ordinary living entities. Having held the impersonal point of view in 
their past lives, they have been put into this stationary condition of life, 
but now they have the opportunity of seeing You in Våndävana, and 
they are praying for further advancement in spiritual life through Your 
personal association. Generally, living entities in the mode of darkness 
obtain the bodies of trees. The impersonalist philosophers are in that 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
151
darkness, but they eradicate it by taking full advantage of Your presence. 
I think the drones that are buzzing all around You must have been Your 
devotees in their past lives. They cannot leave Your company because 
no one can be a better, more affectionate master than You. You are the 
supreme and original Personality of Godhead, and the drones are just 
trying to spread Your glories by chanting at every moment. I think some 
of them must be great sages, devotees of Your Lordship, and they are 
disguising themselves in the form of drones because they are unable to 
give up Your company even for a moment. My dear brother, You are the 
supreme worshipable Godhead. Just see how the peacocks are dancing 
before You in great ecstasy. The deer, whose behavior is just like that of 
the gopés, are welcoming You with the same affection. And the cuckoos 
who are residing in this forest are welcoming You with their joyful, 
sweet cries because they consider that Your appearance in their home is 
so auspicious. Even though they are trees and animals, these residents of 
Våndävana are glorifying You. They are prepared to welcome You to the 
best of their ability, as is the practice of great souls in receiving another 
great soul at home. As for the land, it is so pious and fortunate because 
the footprints of Your lotus feet are marking its body. 
“It is quite natural for these Våndävana inhabitants to thus receive a 
great personality like You. The herbs, creepers and plants are also so 
fortunate to touch Your lotus feet. And by Your touching the twigs with 
Your fingernails, these small plants are also made glorious. As for the 
hills and the rivers, they too are now glorious because You are glancing 
at them. Above all, the damsels of Vraja, the gopés, are the most glorious 
because You embrace them with Your strong arms, being attracted by 
their beauty.” 
In this way, Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma began to enjoy the residents of 
Våndävana to Their full satisfaction as They herded the calves and cows 
on the bank of the Yamunä. In some places Kåñëa and Balaräma were 
accompanied by Their friends. The boys were singing, imitating the 
humming sound of the drones and accompanying Kåñëa and Balaräma, 
who were garlanded with forest flowers. While walking, the boys 
sometimes imitated the quacking sound of the swans in the lakes, or 
when they saw the peacocks dancing, they imitated them before Kåñëa. 
Kåñëa also moved His neck, imitating the dancing and making His 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
152
friends laugh. 
The cows taken care of by Kåñëa had different names, and Kåñëa would 
call them with love. After hearing Kåñëa calling, the cows would 
immediately respond by mooing, and the boys would enjoy this exchange 
to their hearts’ content. They would all imitate the sound vibrations 
made by the different kinds of birds, especially the cakoras, peacocks, 
cuckoos and bhäradväjas. Sometimes, when they would see the weaker 
animals fleeing out of fear of the sounds of tigers and lions, the boys, 
along with Kåñëa and Balaräma, would imitate the animals and run away 
with them. When they felt some fatigue, they would sit down, and 
Balaräma would put His head on the lap of one of the boys just to take 
rest, and Kåñëa would immediately come and begin massaging the legs of 
Balaräma. And sometimes He would take a palm fan and fan the body of 
Balaräma, causing a pleasing breeze to relieve Him of His fatigue. Other 
boys would sometimes dance or sing while Balaräma took rest, and 
sometimes they would wrestle amongst themselves or jump. When the 
boys were thus engaged, Kåñëa would immediately join them, and 
catching their hands, He would enjoy their company and laugh and 
praise their activities. When Kåñëa would feel tired and fatigued, He 
would sometimes take shelter of the root of a big tree or the lap of a 
cowherd boy, and lie down. When He would lie down with a boy or a 
root as His pillow, some of the boys would come and massage His legs, 
and some would fan His body with a fan made from leaves. Some of the 
more talented boys would sing in very sweet voices to please Him. Thus 
very soon His fatigue would go away. The Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Kåñëa, whose legs are tended by the goddess of fortune, shared 
Himself with the cowherd boys as one of them, expanding His internal 
potency to appear exactly like a village boy. But despite His appearing 
just like a village boy, there were occasions when He proved Himself to 
be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sometimes men pose 
themselves as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and cheat innocent 
people, but they can only cheat; they cannot exhibit the potency of God. 
While Kåñëa was thus engaged in His transcendental pastimes, 
exhibiting His internal potency along with His supermost fortunate 
friends, there occurred another chance for Him to exhibit the 
superhuman powers of Godhead. His most intimate friends Çrédämä, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
153
Subala and Stoka Kåñëa addressed Kåñëa and Balaräma with great love 
and affection thus: “Dear Balaräma, You are very powerful; Your arms 
are very strong. Dear Kåñëa, You are very expert in killing all kinds of 
disturbing demons. Will You kindly note that just near this place there 
is a big forest of the name Tälavana. This forest is full of palm trees, and 
all the trees are filled with fruits. Some are falling down, and some of 
them are very ripe even in the trees. It is a very nice place, but because 
of a great demon, Dhenukäsura, it is very difficult to go there. No one 
can reach the trees to collect the fruits. Dear Kåñëa and Balaräma, this 
demon is present there in the form of an ass, and he is surrounded by 
similar demon friends who have assumed the same shape. All of them 
are very strong, so it is very difficult to approach this place. Dear 
brothers, You are the only persons who can kill such demons. Other 
than You, no one can go there for fear of being killed. Not even animals 
go there, and no birds are living there; they have all left. One can only 
appreciate the sweet aroma that is coming from that place. It appears 
that up until now, no one has tasted the sweet fruits there, either on the 
tree or on the ground. Dear Kåñëa, to tell You frankly, we are very 
attracted by this sweet aroma. Dear Balaräma, if You like, let us all go 
there and enjoy these fruits. The aroma of the fruits is now spread 
everywhere. Don’t You smell it from here?” 
When Balaräma and Kåñëa were thus petitioned by Their intimate 
friends, They were inclined to please them, and with smiling faces They 
proceeded towards the forest, surrounded by all Their friends. 
Immediately upon entering the Tälavana, Balaräma began to yank the 
trees with His arms, exhibiting the strength of an elephant. Because of 
this jerking, all the ripe fruits fell down on the ground. Upon hearing 
the sound of the falling fruits, the demon Dhenukäsura, who was living 
there in the form of an ass, approached with great force, shaking the 
whole field so that all the trees moved as if there were an earthquake. 
The demon appeared before Balaräma and kicked His chest with his 
hind legs. At first Balaräma did not say anything, but with great anger 
the demon kicked Him again more vehemently. This time Balaräma 
immediately caught hold of the legs of the ass with one hand and, 
wheeling him around, threw him into the treetops. While he was being 
wheeled around by Balaräma, the demon lost his life. Balaräma threw 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
154
the demon into the biggest palm tree about, and the demon’s body was so 
heavy that the palm tree fell upon other trees, and several fell down. It 
appeared as if a great hurricane had passed through the forest, and all 
the trees were falling down, one after another. This exhibition of 
extraordinary strength is not astonishing because Balaräma is the 
Personality of Godhead known as Ananta Çeña Näga, who is holding all 
the planets on the hoods of His millions of heads. He maintains the 
whole cosmic manifestation exactly as horizontal and vertical threads 
hold the weaving of a cloth. 
After the demon had been thrown into the trees, all the friends and 
associates of Dhenukäsura immediately assembled and attacked 
Balaräma and Kåñëa with great force. They were determined to retaliate 
and avenge the death of their friend. But Kåñëa and Balaräma caught 
each of the asses by the hind legs and, exactly in the same way, wheeled 
them around. Thus They killed all of them and threw them into the 
palm trees. Because of the dead bodies of the asses, there was a 
panoramic scene. It appeared as if clouds of various colors were 
assembled in the trees. Hearing of this great incident, the demigods from 
the higher planets showered flowers on Kåñëa and Balaräma and beat 
their drums and offered devotional prayers. 
A few days after the killing of Dhenukäsura, people began to come into 
the Tälavana forest to collect the fruits, and animals began to return 
without fear to feed on the nice grasses grown there. Just by chanting or 
hearing these transcendental activities and pastimes of the brothers 
Kåñëa and Balaräma, one can amass pious activities. 
When Kåñëa, Balaräma and Their friends entered the village of 
Våndävana, They played Their flutes, and the boys praised Their 
uncommon activities in the forest. Their faces were decorated with 
tilaka and smeared with the dust raised by the cows, and Kåñëa’s head 
was decorated with a peacock feather. Both He and Balaräma played 
Their flutes, and the young gopés were joyous to see Kåñëa returning 
home. All the gopés in Våndävana remained very morose on account of 
Kåñëa’s absence. All day they were thinking of Kåñëa in the forest or of 
Him herding cows in the pasture. When they saw Kåñëa returning, all 
their anxieties were immediately relieved, and they began to look at His 
face the way drones hover over the honey of the lotus flower. When 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
155
Kåñëa entered the village, the young gopés smiled and laughed. Kåñëa, 
while playing the flute, enjoyed the beautiful smiling faces of the gopés. 
Then Kåñëa and Balaräma were immediately received by Their 
affectionate mothers, Yaçodä and Rohiëé, who, according to the time’s 
demands, began to fulfill the desires of their affectionate sons. 
Simultaneously, the mothers rendered service and bestowed benediction 
upon their transcendental sons. They took care of their children by 
bathing Them and dressing Them very nicely. Kåñëa was dressed in 
yellowish garments, and Balaräma was dressed in bluish garments, and 
They were given all sorts of ornaments and flower garlands. Being 
relieved of the fatigue of Their day’s work in the pasturing ground, They 
looked refreshed and very beautiful. 
They were given palatable dishes by Their mothers, and They pleasantly 
ate everything. After eating, They were seated nicely on clean bedding, 
and the mothers began to sing various songs of Their activities. As soon 
as They sat down on the bedding, They very quickly fell fast asleep. In 
this way, Kåñëa and Balaräma used to enjoy Våndävana life as cowherd 
boys. 
Sometimes Kåñëa used to go with His boyfriends and with Balaräma, and 
sometimes He used to go alone with His friends to the bank of the 
Yamunä and tend the cows. Gradually, the summer season arrived, and 
one day, while in the field, the boys and cows became very thirsty and 
began to drink the water of the Yamunä. The river, however, had been 
made poisonous by the venom of the great serpent known as Käliya. 
Because the water was so poisonous, the boys and cows became visibly 
affected immediately after drinking. They suddenly fell down on the 
ground, apparently dead. Then Kåñëa, who is the life of all that lives, 
simply cast His merciful glance over them, and all the boys and cows 
regained consciousness and began to look at one another with great 
astonishment. They could understand that by drinking the water of the 
Yamunä they had died and that the merciful glance of Kåñëa had 
restored their life. Thus they appreciated the mystic power of Kåñëa, 
who is known as Yogeçvara, the master of all mystic yogés. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Fifteenth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“The Killing of Dhenukäsura.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
156
CHAPTER SIXTEEN 
Subduing Käliya 
 
When He understood that the water of the Yamunä was being polluted 
by the black serpent Käliya, Lord Kåñëa took action against him and 
made him leave the Yamunä and go elsewhere, and thus the water 
became purified. 
When this story was being narrated by Çukadeva Gosvämé, Mahäräja 
Parékñit became eager to hear more about Kåñëa’s childhood pastimes. 
He inquired from Çukadeva Gosvämé how Kåñëa chastised Käliya, who 
had been living in the water for many years. Actually, Mahäräja Parékñit 
was becoming more and more enthusiastic to hear the transcendental 
pastimes of Kåñëa, and his inquiry was made with great interest. 
Çukadeva Gosvämé narrated the story as follows. Within the river 
Yamunä there was a great lake, and in that lake the black serpent Käliya 
used to live. Because of his poison, the whole area was so contaminated 
that it emanated a poisonous vapor twenty-four hours a day. If a bird 
happened to even pass over the spot, it would immediately die and fall 
down in the water. 
Due to the poisonous effect of the Yamunä’s vapors, the trees and grass 
near the bank of the Yamunä had all dried up. Lord Kåñëa saw the effect 
of the great serpent’s poison; the whole river that ran before Våndävana 
was now deadly. 
Kåñëa, who advented Himself just to kill all undesirable elements in the 
world, immediately climbed up into a big kadamba tree on the bank of 
the Yamunä. The kadamba is a tree bearing round yellow flowers that is 
generally seen only in the Våndävana area. After climbing to the top of 
the tree, He tightened His belt cloth and, flapping His arms just like a 
wrestler, jumped into the midst of the poisonous lake. The kadamba tree 
from which Kåñëa had jumped was the only tree there which was not 
dead. Some commentators say that due to being touched by the lotus 
feet of Kåñëa, the tree immediately became alive. In some other Puräëas 
it is stated that Garuòa, the eternal carrier of Viñëu, knew that Kåñëa 
would take this action in the future, and so he put some nectar on this 
tree to preserve it. When Lord Kåñëa jumped into the water, the river 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
157
overflooded its banks to a distance of one hundred yards, as if something 
very large had fallen into it. This exhibition of Kåñëa’s strength is not at 
all uncommon, because He is the reservoir of all strength. 
When Kåñëa was swimming about just like a great strong elephant, He 
made a tumultuous sound, which the great black serpent Käliya could 
hear. The tumult was intolerable for him, and he could understand that 
this was an attempt to attack his home. Therefore he immediately came 
before Kåñëa. Käliya saw that Kåñëa was indeed worth seeing because 
His body was so beautiful and delicate; its color resembled that of a 
cloud, and His legs resembled a lotus flower. He was decorated with 
Çrévatsa, jewels and yellow garments. He was smiling with a beautiful 
face and was playing in the river Yamunä with great strength. But in 
spite of Kåñëa’s beautiful features, Käliya felt great anger within his 
heart, and thus he grabbed Kåñëa with his mighty coils. Seeing the 
incredible way in which Kåñëa was enveloped in the coils of the serpent, 
the affectionate cowherd boys and other inhabitants of Våndävana 
immediately became stunned out of fear. They had dedicated everything 
to Kåñëa: their lives, property, affection, activities—everything was for 
Kåñëa—and when they saw Him in that condition, they became 
overwhelmed with fear and fell down on the ground. All the cows, bulls 
and small calves became overwhelmed with grief, and they began to look 
at Him with great anxiety. Out of fear they could only cry in agony and 
stand erect on the bank, unable to help their beloved Kåñëa. 
While this scene was taking place on the bank of the Yamunä, there 
were ill omens manifest. The earth trembled, meteors fell from the sky, 
and the left side of men’s bodies shivered. All these are indications of 
great immediate danger. Observing the inauspicious signs, the cowherd 
men, including Mahäräja Nanda, became very anxious out of fear. At 
the same time they were informed that Kåñëa had gone to the pasturing 
ground without His elder brother, Balaräma. As soon as Nanda and 
Yaçodä and the cowherd men heard this news, they became even more 
anxious. Out of their great affection for Kåñëa, and being unaware of the 
extent of His potencies, they became overwhelmed with grief and 
anxiety because they had nothing dearer than Kåñëa and because they 
had dedicated their everything—life, property, affection, mind and 
activities—to Kåñëa. Because of their great attachment for Kåñëa, they 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
158
thought, “Today Kåñëa is surely going to be vanquished!” 
All the inhabitants of Våndävana came out of the village to see Kåñëa. 
The assembly consisted of children, old men, women, animals and all 
living entities; they knew that Kåñëa was their only means of 
sustenance. While this was happening, Balaräma, who is the master of 
all knowledge, stood there simply smiling. He knew how powerful His 
younger brother Kåñëa was and that there was no cause for anxiety 
when Kåñëa was fighting with an ordinary serpent of the material world. 
He did not, therefore, personally take any part in their sorrow. On the 
other hand, all the inhabitants of Våndävana, being disturbed, began to 
search out Kåñëa by following the impression of His footprints on the 
ground, and thus they moved hastily towards the bank of the Yamunä. 
Finally, by following the footprints marked with flag, bow and 
conchshell, the inhabitants of Våndävana arrived at the riverbank and 
saw that all the cows and boys were weeping to behold Kåñëa enwrapped 
in the coils of the black serpent. Then they became still more 
overwhelmed with grief. While Balaräma was smiling to see their 
lamentation, all the inhabitants of Vrajabhümi merged into the ocean of 
grief because they thought that Kåñëa was finished. Although the 
residents of Våndävana did not know much about Kåñëa, their love for 
Him was beyond comparison. As soon as they saw that Kåñëa was in the 
river Yamunä enveloped by the serpent Käliya and that all the boys and 
cows were lamenting, they simply began to think of Kåñëa’s friendship, 
His smiling face, His sweet words and His dealings with them. Thinking 
of all these and seeing that their Kåñëa was now within the clutches of 
Käliya, they at once felt that the three worlds had become vacant. Lord 
Caitanya also said that He was seeing the three worlds as vacant for 
want of Kåñëa. This is the highest stage of Kåñëa consciousness. Almost 
all of the inhabitants of Våndävana had the highest ecstatic love for 
Kåñëa. 
When mother Yaçodä arrived, she wanted to enter the river Yamunä, 
and being checked, she fainted. Her friends, who were equally aggrieved, 
were shedding tears like torrents of rain or waves of the river, but in 
order to bring mother Yaçodä to consciousness, they began to speak 
loudly about the transcendental pastimes of Kåñëa. Mother Yaçodä 
remained still, as if dead, because her consciousness was concentrated on 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
159
the face of Kåñëa. Nanda and all the other cowherd men, who had 
dedicated everything, including their lives, to Kåñëa, were ready to enter 
the waters of the Yamunä, but Lord Balaräma checked them because He 
was in perfect knowledge that there was no danger. 
For two hours Kåñëa remained like an ordinary child gripped in the coils 
of Käliya, but when He saw that all the inhabitants of Gokula—
including His mother and father, the gopés, the boys and the cows—were 
just on the point of death and that they had no shelter for salvation 
from imminent death, Kåñëa immediately freed Himself. He began to 
expand His body, and when the serpent tried to hold Him, he felt a great 
strain. On account of the strain, his coils slackened, and he had no 
alternative but to let loose the Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, from his 
grasp. Käliya then became very angry, and his great hoods expanded. He 
exhaled poisonous fumes from his nostrils, his eyes blazed like fire, and 
flames issued from his mouth. The great serpent remained still for some 
time, looking at Kåñëa. Licking his lips with bifurcated tongues, the 
serpent looked at Kåñëa with double hoods, and his eyesight was full of 
poison. Kåñëa immediately pounced upon him, just as Garuòa swoops 
upon a snake. Thus attacked, Käliya looked for an opportunity to bite 
Him, but Kåñëa moved around him. As Kåñëa and Käliya moved in a 
circle, the serpent gradually became fatigued, and his strength seemed to 
diminish considerably. Kåñëa immediately pressed down the serpent’s 
hoods and jumped up on them. The Lord’s lotus feet became tinged with 
red from the rays of the jewels on the snake’s hoods. Then He who is the 
original artist of all fine arts, such as dancing, began to dance upon the 
hoods of the serpent, although they were moving to and fro. Upon 
seeing this, the denizens of the upper planets showered flowers, beat 
drums, played different types of flutes and sang various prayers and 
songs. In this way, all the denizens of heaven, such as the Gandharvas, 
Siddhas and demigods, became very pleased. 
While Kåñëa was dancing on his hoods, Käliya tried to push Him down 
with some of his other hoods. Käliya had about a hundred hoods, but 
Kåñëa took control of them. He began to dash Käliya with His lotus feet, 
and this was more than the serpent could bear. Gradually, Käliya was 
reduced to struggling for his very life. He vomited all kinds of refuse and 
exhaled fire. While throwing up poisonous material from within, Käliya 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
160
became reduced in his sinful situation. Out of great anger, he began to 
struggle for existence and tried to raise one of his hoods to kill the Lord. 
The Lord immediately captured that hood and subdued it by kicking it 
and dancing on it. It actually appeared as if the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead Viñëu was being worshiped; the poisons emanating from the 
mouth of the serpent appeared to be like flower offerings. Käliya then 
began to vomit blood instead of poison; he was completely fatigued. His 
whole body appeared to be broken by the kicks of the Lord. Within his 
mind, however, he finally began to understand that Kåñëa is the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he surrendered unto Him. He 
realized that Kåñëa is the Supreme Lord, the master of everything. 
The wives of the serpent, known as the Nägapatnés, saw that their 
husband had been subdued by the Lord’s kicking and that he was almost 
at the point of death due to bearing the heavy burden of the Lord, 
within whose abdomen the whole universe remains. Käliya’s wives 
prepared to worship the Lord, and in their haste their clothes, hair and 
ornaments became disarrayed. They also surrendered unto the Supreme 
Lord and began to pray. They appeared before Him, put forward their 
offspring and anxiously offered respectful obeisances, falling down on 
the bank of the Yamunä. The Nägapatnés knew that Kåñëa is the shelter 
of all surrendered souls, and they desired to release their husband from 
the impending danger by pleasing the Lord with their prayers. 
The Nägapatnés began to offer their prayers as follows: “O dear Lord, 
You are equal to everyone. For You there is no distinction between Your 
sons, friends or enemies. Therefore the punishment which You have so 
kindly offered to Käliya is exactly befitting. O Lord, You have descended 
especially for the purpose of annihilating all kinds of disturbing 
elements within the world, and because You are the Absolute Truth, 
there is no difference between Your mercy and Your punishment. We 
think, therefore, that this apparent punishment of Käliya is actually 
some benediction. We consider that Your punishment is Your great 
mercy upon us because when You punish someone it is to be understood 
that the reactions of his sinful activities are eradicated. It is already clear 
that this creature appearing in the body of a serpent must have been 
overburdened with all kinds of sin; otherwise, how could he have the 
body of a serpent? Your dancing on his hoods has reduced all the sinful 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
161
results of actions caused by his having this body of a serpent. It is 
therefore very auspicious that You have become angry and have 
punished him in this way. We are very much astonished to see how You 
have become so much pleased with this serpent, who evidently 
performed various religious activities in his past lives that pleased 
everyone. He must have undergone all kinds of penances and austerities, 
humbly honored others and executed universal welfare activities for all 
living creatures.” 
The Nägapatnés confirm that one cannot come in contact with Kåñëa 
without having executed pious activities in devotional service in his 
previous lives. As Lord Caitanya advised in His Çikñäñöaka, one has to 
execute devotional service by humbly chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra, 
thinking oneself lower than the straw in the street and not expecting 
honor for himself but offering all kinds of honor to others. The 
Nägapatnés were astonished that, although Käliya had the body of a 
serpent as the result of grievous sinful activities, at the same time he was 
in contact with the Lord to the extent that the Lord’s lotus feet were 
touching his hoods. Certainly this was not the ordinary result of pious 
activities. These two contradictory facts astonished them. Thus they 
continued to pray: “O dear Lord, we are simply astonished to see that he 
is so fortunate as to have the dust of Your lotus feet on his head. This is 
a fortune sought after by great saintly persons. Even the goddess of 
fortune underwent severe austerities just to have the blessing of the dust 
of Your lotus feet, so how is it that Käliya is so easily getting this dust on 
his head? We have heard from authoritative sources that those who are 
blessed with the dust of Your lotus feet do not care even for the highest 
post within the universe, namely the post of Lord Brahmä, or the 
kingship of the heavenly planets, or the sovereignty of this planet. Nor 
do such persons desire to rule the planets above this earth, such as 
Siddhaloka; nor do they aspire for the mystic powers achieved by the 
yoga process. Nor do the pure devotees aspire for liberation by becoming 
one with You. My Lord, although he is born in a species of life which is 
fostered by the most abominable modes of material nature, accompanied 
with the quality of anger, this king of the serpents has achieved 
something very, very rare. Living entities who are wandering within this 
universe in different species of life can very easily achieve the greatest 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
162
benediction only by Your mercy.” 
It is also confirmed in the Caitanya-caritämåta that the living entities 
are wandering within the universe in various species of life, but by the 
mercy of Kåñëa and the spiritual master they can get the seed of 
devotional service, and thus their path of liberation can be cleared. 
The Nägapatnés continued, “We therefore offer our respectful 
obeisances unto You, our dear Lord, because You are the Supreme 
Person, who are living as the Supersoul within every living entity; 
although You are transcendental to the cosmic manifestation, 
everything is resting in You. You are the personified indefatigable 
eternal time. The entire time force is existing in You, and You are 
therefore the seer and the embodiment of total time in the shape of past, 
present and future, month, day, hour, moment—everything. In other 
words, O Lord, You can see perfectly all the activities happening in 
every moment, in every hour, in every day, in every month, in every 
year, past, present and future. You are Yourself the universal form, and 
yet You are different from this universe. You are simultaneously one 
with and different from the universe. We therefore offer our respectful 
obeisances unto You. You are Yourself the whole universe, and yet You 
are the creator of the whole universe. You are the superintendent and 
maintainer of this whole universe, and You are its original cause. 
Although You are present within this universe by Your three qualitative 
incarnations, Brahmä, Viñëu and Maheçvara, You are transcendental to 
the material creation. Although You are the cause of the appearance of 
all kinds of living entities—their senses, their lives, their minds, their 
intelligence—You are to be realized by Your internal energy. Let us 
therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto You, who are unlimited, 
finer than the finest, the center of all creation and knower of 
everything. Different varieties of philosophical speculators try to reach 
You. You are the ultimate goal of all philosophical efforts, and it is 
actually only You who are described by all philosophies and by different 
kinds of doctrines. Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto You, 
because You are the origin of all scripture and the source of knowledge. 
You are the root of all evidences, and You are the Supreme Person who 
can bestow upon us the supreme knowledge. You are the cause of all 
kinds of desires, and You are the cause of all kinds of satisfaction. You 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
163
are the Vedas personified. Therefore we offer You our respectful 
obeisances. 
“Our dear Lord, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, 
and You are also the supreme enjoyer. You have now appeared as the son 
of Vasudeva, a manifestation of the pure state of goodness. You are the 
predominating Deities of mind and intelligence, Aniruddha and 
Pradyumna, and You are the Lord of all Vaiñëavas. By Your expansion as 
the catur-vyüha—namely Väsudeva, Saìkarñaëa, Aniruddha and 
Pradyumna—You are the cause of the development of mind and 
intelligence. By Your activities only, the living entities become covered 
by forgetfulness or discover their real identity. This is confirmed in the 
Bhagavad-gétä (Fifteenth Chapter): the Lord is sitting as the Supersoul 
in everyone’s heart, and due to His presence the living entity either 
forgets himself or revives his original identity. We can partially 
understand that You are within our hearts as the witness of all our 
activities, but it is very difficult to appreciate Your presence, although 
every one of us can do so to some extent. You are the supreme controller 
of both the material and spiritual energies; therefore You are the 
supreme leader, although You are different from this cosmic 
manifestation. You are the witness and creator and the very ingredient 
of this cosmic manifestation. We therefore offer our respectful 
obeisances unto You. 
“Our dear Lord, in the matter of creating this cosmic manifestation, 
personally You have nothing to exert; by expending Your different kinds 
of energy—namely the mode of passion, the mode of goodness and the 
mode of ignorance—You create, maintain and annihilate this cosmic 
manifestation. As the controller of the entire time force, You simply 
glance over the material energy, thereby creating this universe and 
energizing the different modes of material nature, which act differently 
in different creatures. No one can estimate, therefore, how Your 
activities are going on within this world. Our dear Lord, although You 
have expanded into the three principal deities of this universe—namely 
Lord Brahmä, Lord Viñëu and Lord Çiva—for creation, maintenance 
and destruction, Your appearance as Lord Viñëu is actually for the 
benediction of living creatures. Therefore, for those who are actually 
peaceful and who are aspiring after the supreme peace, worship of Your 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
164
peaceful appearance as Lord Viñëu is recommended. 
“O Lord, we are submitting our prayers unto You. You can appreciate 
that this poor serpent is going to give up his life. You know that for us 
women our husband is our life and everything; therefore, we are praying 
unto You that You kindly excuse Käliya, our husband, because if this 
serpent dies, then we shall be in great difficulty. Looking upon us only, 
please excuse this great offender. Our dear Lord, every living creature is 
Your offspring, and You maintain everyone. This serpent is also Your 
offspring, and You can excuse him once although he has offended You, 
undoubtedly without knowing Your supremacy. We are praying that he 
may be excused this time. Our dear Lord, we are offering our loving 
service unto You because we are all eternal servitors of Your Lordship. 
You can order us to do whatever You please. Every living being can be 
relieved from all kinds of despair if he agrees to abide by Your orders.” 
After the Nägapatnés submitted their prayers, Lord Kåñëa released 
Käliya from his punishment. Käliya was already unconscious from being 
struck by the Lord. Upon regaining consciousness and being released 
from the punishment, Käliya got back his life force and the working 
power of his senses. With folded hands, he humbly began to pray to the 
Supreme Lord Kåñëa: “My dear Lord, I have been born in such a species 
that by nature I am angry and envious, being in the darkest region of the 
mode of ignorance. Your Lordship knows well that it is very difficult to 
give up one’s natural instincts, although by such instincts the living 
creature transmigrates from one body to another.” It is also confirmed in 
the Bhagavad-gétä that it is very difficult to get out of the clutches of 
material nature, but if anyone surrenders unto the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Kåñëa, the modes of material nature can no longer act on 
him. “My dear Lord,” Käliya continued, “You are the original creator of 
the modes of material nature, by which the universe is created. You are 
the cause of the different kinds of mentality possessed by living 
creatures, by which they have obtained different varieties of bodies. My 
dear Lord, I am born as a serpent; therefore, by natural instinct I am 
very angry. How is it then possible to give up my acquired nature 
without Your mercy? It is very difficult to get out of the clutches of Your 
mäyä. By Your mäyä we remain enslaved. My dear Lord, kindly excuse 
me for my inevitable material tendencies. I surrender unto You. Now 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
165
You can punish me or save me, as You desire.” 
After hearing this, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was acting 
as a small human child, ordered the serpent thus: “You must immediately 
leave this place and go to the ocean. Leave without delay. You can take 
with you all your offspring, wives and everything that you possess. Don’t 
pollute the waters of the Yamunä. Let it be drunk by My cows and 
cowherd boys without hindrance.” The Lord then declared that the 
order given to the Käliya snake be recited and heard by everyone so that 
no one need fear Käliya any longer. 
Anyone who hears the narration of the Käliya serpent and his 
punishment will need fear no more the envious activities of snakes. The 
Lord also declared, “If one takes a bath in the Käliya lake, where My 
cowherd boyfriends and I have bathed, or if one fasts for a day and offers 
oblations to the forefathers from the water of this lake, he will be 
relieved from all kinds of sinful reactions.” The Lord also assured Käliya: 
“You came here out of fear of Garuòa, who wanted to eat you in the 
beautiful land by the ocean. Now, after seeing the marks where I have 
touched your head with My lotus feet, Garuòa will not disturb you.” 
The Lord was pleased with Käliya and his wives. Immediately after 
hearing His order, the snake and his wives began to worship Him with 
great offerings of nice garments, flowers, garlands, jewels, ornaments, 
sandal pulp, lotus flowers and nice eatable fruits. In this way they 
pleased the master of Garuòa, of whom they were very much afraid. 
Then, obeying the orders of Lord Kåñëa, all of them left the lake within 
the Yamunä. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Sixteenth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Subduing Käliya.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
166
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN 
Extinguishing the Forest Fire 
 
King Parékñit, after hearing of the chastisement of Käliya, inquired from 
Çukadeva Gosvämé as to why Käliya left his beautiful land and why 
Garuòa was so antagonistic to him. Çukadeva Gosvämé informed the 
King that the island known as Nägälaya was inhabited by serpents and 
that Käliya was one of the chief serpents there. Being accustomed to 
eating snakes, Garuòa used to come to this island and kill many serpents 
at will. Some of them he actually ate, but some were unnecessarily killed. 
The reptile society became so disturbed that their leader, Väsuki, 
appealed to Lord Brahmä for protection. Lord Brahmä made an 
arrangement by which Garuòa would not create a disturbance: on each 
half-moon day, the reptile community would offer a serpent to Garuòa. 
The serpent was to be kept underneath a tree as a sacrificial offering to 
Garuòa. Garuòa was satisfied with this offering, and therefore he did not 
disturb any other serpents. 
But gradually, Käliya took advantage of this situation. He was 
unnecessarily puffed up by the volume of his accumulated poison, as well 
as by his material power, and he thought, “Why should Garuòa be 
offered this sacrifice?” He then ceased offering any sacrifice; instead, he 
himself ate the offering intended for Garuòa. When Garuòa, the great 
devotee-carrier of Viñëu, understood that Käliya was eating the offered 
sacrifices, he became very angry and rushed to the island to kill the 
offensive serpent. Käliya tried to fight Garuòa and faced him with his 
many hoods and poisonous sharp teeth. Käliya attempted to bite him, 
and Garuòa, the son of Tärkñya, in great anger and with the great force 
befitting the carrier of Lord Viñëu, struck the body of Käliya with his 
effulgent golden wings. Käliya, who is also known as Kadrusuta, son of 
Kadru, immediately fled to the lake known as Käliya-hrada, which lay 
within the Yamunä River and which Garuòa could not approach. 
Käliya took shelter within the water of the Yamunä for the following 
reason. Just as Garuòa went to the island of the Käliya snake, he also 
used to go to the Yamunä to catch fish to eat. There was, however, a 
great yogé known as Saubhari Muni, who used to meditate within the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
167
water there and who was sympathetic with the fish. He asked Garuòa 
not to come there and disturb the fish. Although Garuòa was not under 
anyone’s order, being the carrier of Lord Viñëu, he did not disobey the 
order of the great yogé. Instead of staying and eating many fish, he 
carried off one big fish, who was their leader. Saubhari Muni was sorry 
that one of the leaders of the fish was taken away by Garuòa, and 
thinking of their protection, he cursed Garuòa with the following words: 
“Henceforward, from this day, if Garuòa comes here to catch fish, 
then—I say this with all my strength—he will be immediately killed.” 
This curse was known only to Käliya. Käliya was therefore confident 
that Garuòa would not be able to come there, and so he thought it wise 
to take shelter of the lake within the Yamunä. But Käliya’s taking 
shelter of Saubhari Muni was not successful; he was driven away from 
the Yamunä by Kåñëa, the master of Garuòa. It may be noted that 
Garuòa is directly related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is 
so powerful that he is never subject to anyone’s order or curse. Actually 
the cursing of Garuòa—who is stated in Çrémad-Bhägavatam to be of the 
stature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavän—was an 
offense on the part of Saubhari Muni. Although Garuòa did not try to 
retaliate, the Muni was not saved from his offensive act against a great 
Vaiñëava personality. Due to this offense, Saubhari fell down from his 
yogic position and afterwards became a householder, a sense enjoyer in 
the material world. The falldown of Saubhari Muni, who was supposed 
to be absorbed in spiritual bliss by meditation, is an instruction to the 
offender of Vaiñëavas. 
When Kåñëa finally came out of Käliya’s lake, He was seen by all His 
friends and relatives on the bank of the Yamunä. He appeared before 
them nicely decorated, smeared all over with candana pulp, bedecked 
with valuable jewels and stones, and almost completely covered with 
gold. The inhabitants of Våndävana, including the cowherd boys and 
men, the gopés, mother Yaçodä, Mahäräja Nanda and all the cows and 
calves, saw Kåñëa coming from the Yamunä, and it was as though they 
had recovered their very life. When a person regains his life, naturally 
he becomes absorbed in pleasure and joyfulness. They each in turn 
pressed Kåñëa to their chests, and thus they felt a great relief. Mother 
Yaçodä, Rohiëé, Mahäräja Nanda and the cowherd men became so 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
168
happy that they embraced Kåñëa and thought they had achieved their 
ultimate goal of life. 
Balaräma also embraced Kåñëa, but He was laughing because when 
everyone else was so overwhelmed with anxiety, He had known what 
would happen to Kåñëa. All the trees on the bank of the Yamunä, along 
with all the cows, bulls and calves, were full of pleasure because of 
Kåñëa’s appearance there. The brähmaëa inhabitants of Våndävana 
immediately came with their wives to congratulate Kåñëa and His family 
members. And because brähmaëas are considered to be the spiritual 
masters of society, they offered their blessings to Kåñëa and His family 
on account of Kåñëa’s release. They also asked Mahäräja Nanda to give 
them some charity on that occasion. Being so pleased by Kåñëa’s return, 
Mahäräja Nanda gave many cows and much gold in charity to the 
brähmaëas. While Nanda Mahäräja was thus engaged, mother Yaçodä 
simply embraced Kåñëa and made Him sit on her lap while she shed tears 
continuously. 
Since it was almost night, and all the inhabitants of Våndävana, 
including the cows and calves, were very tired, they decided to take their 
rest on the riverbank. In the middle of the night, while they were taking 
rest, there was suddenly a great forest fire, and it quickly appeared that 
the fire would soon devour all the inhabitants of Våndävana. As soon as 
they felt the warmth of the fire, they immediately took shelter of Kåñëa, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although He was playing just like 
their child. They began to say, “Our dear Kåñëa! O Supreme Personality 
of Godhead! Our dear Balaräma, the reservoir of all strength! Please try 
to save us from this all-devouring and devastating fire. We have no 
shelter other than You. This devastating fire will swallow us all!” Thus 
they prayed to Kåñëa, saying that they could not take any shelter other 
than His lotus feet. Lord Kåñëa, being compassionate upon His own 
townspeople, immediately swallowed up the whole forest fire and saved 
them. This was not impossible for Kåñëa, because He is unlimited. He 
has unlimited power to do anything He desires. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Seventeenth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Extinguishing the Forest Fire.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
169
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN 
Killing the Demon Pralambäsura 
 
After extinguishing the devastating fire, Lord Kåñëa, surrounded by His 
relatives, friends, cows, calves and bulls and glorified by His friends’ 
singing, again entered Våndävana, which is always full of cows. While 
Kåñëa and Balaräma were enjoying life in Våndävana, in the midst of 
the cowherd boys and girls, the season gradually changed to summer. 
The summer season in India is not very much welcomed because of the 
excessive heat, but in Våndävana everyone was pleased because summer 
there appeared just like spring. This was possible only because Lord 
Kåñëa and Balaräma, who are the controllers even of Lord Brahmä and 
Lord Çiva, were residing there. In Våndävana there are many falls which 
are always pouring water, and the sound is so sweet that it covers the 
sound of the crickets. And because water flows all over, the forest always 
looks very green and beautiful. 
The inhabitants of Våndävana were never disturbed by the scorching 
heat of the sun or the high summer temperatures. The lakes of 
Våndävana are surrounded by green grasses, and various kinds of lotus 
flowers bloom there, such as the kahlära, kaïja and utpala, and the air 
blowing in Våndävana carries the aromatic pollen of those lotus flowers. 
When the particles of water from the waves of the Yamunä, the lakes 
and the waterfalls touched the bodies of the inhabitants of Våndävana, 
they automatically felt a cooling effect. Therefore they were practically 
undisturbed by the summer season. 
Våndävana is such a nice place. Flowers are always blooming, and there 
are even various kinds of decorated deer. Birds are chirping, peacocks 
are crowing and dancing, and bees are humming. The cuckoos there sing 
nicely in five kinds of tunes. 
Kåñëa, the reservoir of pleasure, blowing His flute, accompanied by His 
elder brother Balaräma and the other cowherd boys and the cows, 
entered the beautiful forest of Våndävana to enjoy the atmosphere. 
They walked into the midst of newly grown leaves of trees whose flowers 
resembled peacock feathers. They were garlanded by those flowers and 
decorated with saffron chalk. Sometimes they were dancing and singing 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
170
and sometimes wrestling with one another. While Kåñëa danced, some of 
the cowherd boys sang, and others played on flutes; some bugled on 
buffalo horns or clapped their hands, praising Kåñëa, “Dear brother, You 
are dancing very nicely.” Actually, all these boys were demigods 
descended from higher planets to assist Kåñëa in His pastimes. The 
demigods garbed in the dress of the cowherd boys were encouraging 
Kåñëa in His dancing, just as one artist encourages another with praise. 
Up to that time, neither Balaräma nor Kåñëa had undergone the 
haircutting ceremony; therefore Their hair was clustered like crows’ 
feathers. They were always playing hide-and-seek with Their boyfriends 
or jumping or fighting with them. Sometimes, while His friends were 
chanting and dancing, Kåñëa would praise them, “My dear friends, you 
are dancing and singing very nicely.” The boys played at catching ball 
with fruits such as bael and ämalaka. They played blindman’s buff, 
challenging and touching one another. Sometimes they imitated the 
forest deer and various kinds of birds. They joked with one another by 
imitating croaking frogs, and they enjoyed swinging underneath the 
trees. Sometimes they would play like a king and his subjects amongst 
themselves. In this way, Balaräma and Kåñëa, along with all Their 
friends, played all kinds of sports and enjoyed the soothing atmosphere 
of Våndävana, full of rivers, lakes, rivulets, fine trees and excellent 
gardens filled with fruits and flowers. 
Once while the boys were engaged in their transcendental pastimes, a 
great demon of the name Pralambäsura entered their company, desiring 
to kidnap both Balaräma and Kåñëa. Although Kåñëa was playing the 
part of a cowherd boy, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead He could 
understand everything—past, present and future. So when 
Pralambäsura entered their company, Kåñëa began to think how to kill 
the demon, but externally He received him as a friend. “O My dear 
friend,” He said. “It is very good that you have come to take part in our 
pastimes.” Kåñëa then called all His friends and ordered them: “Now we 
shall play in pairs. We shall challenge one another in pairs.” With this 
proposal, all the boys assembled together. Some of them took the side of 
Kåñëa, and some of them took the side of Balaräma, and they arranged to 
play in duel. The defeated members in duel fighting had to carry the 
victorious members on their backs, as a horse carries its master. They 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
171
began playing, and at the same time tended the cows as they proceeded 
through the Bhäëòéravana forest. The party of Balaräma, accompanied 
by Çrédämä and Våñabha, came out victorious, and Kåñëa’s party had to 
carry them on their backs through the Bhäëòéravana forest. The 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, being defeated, had to carry 
Çrédämä on His back, and Bhadrasena carried Våñabha. Imitating their 
play, Pralambäsura, who appeared there as a cowherd boy, carried 
Balaräma on his back. Pralambäsura was the greatest of the demons, and 
he had calculated that Kåñëa was the most powerful of the cowherd boys. 
In order to avoid the company of Kåñëa, Pralambäsura carried Balaräma 
far away. The demon was undoubtedly very strong and powerful, but he 
was carrying Balaräma, who is compared to a mountain; therefore he 
began to feel the burden, and thus he assumed his real form. When he 
appeared in his real feature, he was decorated with a golden helmet and 
earrings and looked just like a cloud with lightning carrying the moon. 
Balaräma observed the demon’s body expanding up to the limits of the 
clouds, his eyes dazzling like blazing fire and his mouth flashing with 
sharpened teeth. At first, Balaräma was surprised by the demon’s 
appearance, and He began to wonder, “How is it that all of a sudden this 
carrier has changed in every way?” But with a clear mind He could 
quickly understand that He was being carried away from His friends by a 
demon who intended to kill Him. Immediately He struck the head of the 
demon with His strong fist, just as the King of the heavenly planets 
strikes a mountain with his thunderbolt. Being stricken by the fist of 
Balaräma, the demon fell down dead, just like a snake with a smashed 
head, and blood poured from his mouth. When the demon fell, he made 
a tremendous sound, and it sounded as if a great hill were falling upon 
being struck by the thunderbolt of King Indra. All the boys then rushed 
to the spot. Astonished by the ghastly scene, they began to praise 
Balaräma with the words “Well done, well done.” All of them then 
embraced Balaräma with great affection, thinking that He had returned 
from death, and they offered their blessings and congratulations. All the 
demigods in the heavenly planets became very satisfied and showered 
flowers on the transcendental body of Balaräma, and they also offered 
their blessings and congratulations for His having killed the great demon 
Pralambäsura. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
172
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Eighteenth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Killing the Demon Pralambäsura.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
173
CHAPTER NINETEEN 
Devouring the Forest Fire 
 
While Kåñëa and Balaräma and Their friends were engaged in the 
pastimes described above, the cows, being unobserved, began to wander 
off on their own, entering farther and farther into the deepest part of 
the forest, allured by fresh grasses. The goats, cows and buffalo traveled 
from one forest to another and entered the forest known as Éñékäöavé. 
This forest was full of green grass, and therefore they were allured; but 
when they entered, they saw that there was a forest fire, and they began 
to cry. On the other side Balaräma and Kåñëa, along with Their friends, 
could not find their animals, and they became very aggrieved. They 
began to trace the cows by following their footprints, as well as the path 
of eaten grass. All of the boys were fearing that their very means of 
livelihood, the cows, were now lost. When searching out the cows in the 
forest, they themselves were very much tired and thirsty. Soon, however, 
they heard the crying of their cows. Kåñëa began to call the cows by 
their respective names, with great noise. Upon hearing Kåñëa calling, 
the cows immediately replied with joy. But by this time the forest fire 
had surrounded all of them, and the situation appeared to be very 
fearful. The flames increased as the wind blew very quickly, and it 
appeared that everything movable and immovable would be devoured. 
All the cows and the boys became very frightened, and they looked 
towards Balaräma and Kåñëa the way a dying man looks at the picture of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They said, “My dear Kåñëa! My 
dear Kåñëa! You and Balaräma are very powerful. We are now burning 
from the heat of this blazing fire. Let us take shelter of Your lotus feet. 
We know You can protect us from this great danger. Our dear friend 
Kåñëa, we are Your intimate friends. It is not right that we should suffer 
in this way. We are all completely dependent on You, and You are the 
knower of all religious life. We do not know anyone except You.” 
The Personality of Godhead heard the appealing voices of His friends, 
and casting a pleasing glance over them, He began to answer. By 
speaking through His eyes, He impressed upon His friends that there was 
no cause for fear, and He assured them, “Don’t worry.” Then Kåñëa, the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
174
supreme mystic, the powerful Personality of Godhead, immediately 
swallowed up all the flames of the fire. The cows and boys were thus 
saved from imminent danger. Out of fear, the boys were almost 
unconscious, but when they regained their consciousness and opened 
their eyes, they saw that they were again in the Bhäëòéra forest with 
Kåñëa, Balaräma and the cows. They were astonished to see that they 
were completely free from the attack of the blazing fire and that the 
cows were saved. They secretly thought that Kåñëa must be not an 
ordinary boy but some demigod. 
In the evening, Kåñëa and Balaräma, along with the boys and cows, 
returned to Våndävana, playing Their flutes. As they approached the 
village, all the gopés became very joyous. Throughout the day the gopés 
used to think of Kåñëa while He was in the forest, and in His absence 
they were considering one moment to be like twelve years. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Nineteenth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Devouring the Forest Fire.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
175
CHAPTER TWENTY 
Description of Autumn 
 
The killing of Pralambäsura and the devouring of the devastating forest 
fire by Kåñëa and Balaräma became household topics in Våndävana. The 
cowherd men described these wonderful activities to their wives and to 
everyone else, and all were struck with wonder. They concluded that 
Kåñëa and Balaräma were demigods who had kindly come to Våndävana 
to become their children. In this way, the rainy season ensued. In India, 
after the scorching heat of the summer, the rainy season is very 
welcome. The clouds accumulating in the sky, covering the sun and the 
moon, become very pleasing to the people, and they expect rainfall at 
every moment. After summer, the advent of the rainy season is 
considered to be a life-giving source for everyone. The thunder and 
occasional lightning are also pleasurable to the people. 
The symptoms of the rainy season may be compared to the symptoms of 
the living entities who are covered by the three modes of material 
nature. The unlimited sky is like the Supreme Brahman, and the tiny 
living entities are like the covered sky, or Brahman covered by the three 
modes of material nature. Originally, everyone is part and parcel of 
Brahman. The Supreme Brahman, or the unlimited sky, can never be 
covered by a cloud, but a portion of it can be covered. As stated in the 
Bhagavad-gétä, the living entities are part and parcel of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. But they are only an insignificant portion of 
the Supreme Lord. This portion is covered by the modes of material 
nature, and therefore the living entities are residing within this material 
world. The brahmajyoti—spiritual effulgence—is just like the sunshine; 
as the sunshine is full of molecular shining particles, so the brahmajyoti 
is full of minute portions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Out of 
that unlimited expansion of minute portions of the Supreme Lord, some 
are covered by the influence of material nature, whereas others are free. 
Clouds are accumulated water drawn from the land by the sunshine. 
Continually for eight months the sun evaporates all kinds of water from 
the surface of the globe, and this water is accumulated in the shape of 
clouds, which are distributed as water when there is need. Similarly, a 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
176
government exacts various taxes from the citizens, which the citizens are 
able to pay by their different material activities: agriculture, trade and 
industry; thus the government can also exact taxes in the form of 
income tax and sales tax. This is compared to the sun’s drawing water 
from the earth. When there is again need of water on the surface of the 
globe, the same sunshine converts the water into clouds and distributes 
it all over the globe. Similarly, the taxes collected by the government 
must be distributed to the people again, as educational work, public 
work, sanitary work, etc. This is very essential for a good government. 
The government should not simply exact tax for useless squandering; the 
tax collection should be utilized for the public welfare of the state. 
During the rainy season, there are strong winds blustering all over the 
country and carrying clouds from one place to another to distribute life-
giving water to the needy living entities. When water is urgently needed 
after the summer season, the clouds are just like a rich man who, in 
times of need, distributes his money even by exhausting his whole 
treasury. So the clouds exhaust themselves by distributing water all over 
the surface of the globe. 
When Mahäräja Daçaratha, the father of Lord Rämacandra, used to 
fight with his enemies, it was said that he approached them just like a 
farmer uprooting unnecessary plants and trees. And when there was 
need of giving charity, he used to distribute money exactly as the cloud 
distributes rain. The distribution of rain by clouds is so sumptuous that it 
is compared to the distribution of wealth by a great, munificent person. 
The clouds’ downpour is so sufficient that the rains even fall on rocks 
and hills and on the oceans and seas, where there is no need for water. It 
is like a charitable person who opens his treasury for distribution and 
who does not discriminate whether the charity is needed or not. He 
gives in charity openhandedly. 
Before the rainfall, the whole surface of the globe becomes almost 
depleted of all kinds of energies and appears very lean. After the 
rainfall, the whole surface of the earth becomes green with vegetation 
and appears to be very healthy and strong. Here, a comparison is made 
to the person undergoing austerities for fulfillment of a material desire. 
The flourishing condition of the earth after a rainy season is compared 
to the fulfillment of material desires. Sometimes, when a country is 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
177
subjugated by an undesirable government, persons and parties undergo 
severe penances and austerities to get control of the government, and 
when they attain control, they flourish by giving themselves generous 
salaries. This temporary profit is like the flourishing of the earth in the 
rainy season. Actually, one should undergo severe austerities and 
penances only to achieve spiritual happiness. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is 
recommended that tapasya, or austerity, should be accepted for realizing 
the Supreme Lord. By accepting austerity in devotional service, one 
regains his spiritual life, and as soon as one regains his spiritual life, he 
enjoys unlimited spiritual bliss. But if someone undertakes austerities 
and penances for some material gain, it is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä 
that the results are temporary and that they are desired by persons of 
less intelligence. 
During the rainy season, in the evening, there are many glowworms 
visible about the tops of trees, hither and thither, and they glitter just 
like lights. But the luminaries of the sky, the stars and the moon, are not 
visible. Similarly, in the Age of Kali, persons who are atheists or 
miscreants become very prominently visible, whereas persons who are 
actually following the Vedic principles for spiritual emancipation are 
practically obscured. This age, Kali-yuga, is compared to the cloudy 
season of the living entities. In this age, real knowledge is covered by the 
influence of the material advancement of civilization. The cheap mental 
speculators, atheists and manufacturers of so-called religious principles 
become prominent like the glowworms, whereas persons strictly 
following the Vedic principles or scriptural injunctions become covered 
by the clouds of this age. People should learn to take advantage of the 
actual luminaries of the sky—the sun, moon and stars—instead of the 
glowworm’s light. Actually, the glowworm cannot give any light in the 
darkness of night. As clouds sometimes clear, even in the rainy season, 
and sometimes the moon, stars and sun become visible, so even in this 
Kali-yuga there are sometimes advantages. For example, sometimes Lord 
Caitanya’s Vedic movement of distributing the chanting of the Hare 
Kåñëa mantra is heard. People seriously eager to find real light should 
take advantage of this movement instead of looking toward the light of 
mental speculators and atheists. 
After the first rainfall, when there is a thundering sound in the clouds, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
178
all the frogs begin to croak, like students suddenly engaged in reading 
their studies. Students are generally supposed to rise early in the 
morning. They do not usually arise of their own accord, however, but 
only when there is a bell sounded in the temple or in the spiritual 
institution. By the order of the spiritual master they immediately rise, 
and after finishing their morning duties they sit down to study the Vedas 
or chant Vedic mantras. 
Everyone is sleeping in the darkness of Kali-yuga, but when there is a 
great äcärya, by his calling only, everyone takes to the study of the Vedas 
to acquire actual knowledge. During the rainy season, many small ponds, 
lakes and rivulets become filled with water; otherwise the rest of the 
year they remain dry. Similarly, materialistic persons are dry, but 
sometimes, when they are in a so-called opulent position, with a home or 
children or a little bank balance, they appear to be flourishing, but 
immediately afterwards they become dry again, like the small rivulets 
and ponds. The poet Vidyäpati said that in the society of friends, family, 
children, wife, etc., there is certainly some pleasure, but that pleasure is 
compared to a drop of water in the desert. Everyone is hankering after 
happiness, just as in the desert everyone is hankering after water. If in 
the desert there is a drop of water, it may of course be said that water is 
there, but the benefit from that drop of water is very insignificant. In 
our materialistic way of life, which is just like a desert, we are hankering 
after an ocean of happiness, but in the form of society, friends and 
mundane love we are getting no more than a drop of water. Our 
satisfaction is never achieved, as the small rivulets, lakes and ponds are 
never filled with water in the dry season. 
Due to rainfall, the grass, trees and vegetation look very green. 
Sometimes the grass is covered by a certain kind of red insect, and when 
the green and red combine with umbrellalike mushrooms, the entire 
scene changes, just like a person who has suddenly become rich. The 
farmer then becomes very happy to see his field full of grains, but the 
capitalists—who are always unaware of the activities of a supernatural 
power—become unhappy because they are afraid of a competitive price 
due to abundant production. In some places certain capitalists in 
government restrict the farmers’ production of grain, not knowing the 
actual fact that all food grains are supplied by the Supreme Personality 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
179
of Godhead. According to the Vedic injunction, eko bahünäà yo 
vidadhäti kämän: the Supreme Personality of Godhead maintains this 
creation; therefore, He arranges for a supply of whatever is required for 
all living entities. When there is a population increase, it is the business 
of the Supreme Lord to feed the people. But atheists or miscreants do 
not like abundant production of food grains, especially if their business 
might be hampered. 
During the rainy season, all living entities, in the land, sky and water, 
become very much refreshed, exactly like one who engages in the 
transcendental loving service of the Lord. We have practical experience 
of this with our students in the International Society for Krishna 
Consciousness. Before becoming students, they were dirty-looking, 
although they had naturally beautiful personal features; due to having 
no information of Kåñëa consciousness they appeared very dirty and 
wretched. Since they have taken to Kåñëa consciousness, their health 
has improved, and by their following the rules and regulations, their 
bodily luster has increased. When they are dressed with saffron-colored 
cloth, with tilaka on their foreheads and beads in their hands and on 
their necks, they look exactly as if they have come directly from 
Vaikuëöha. 
In the rainy season, when the rivers swell and rush to the oceans and 
seas, they appear to agitate the ocean. Similarly, if a person who is 
engaged in the mystic yoga process is not very much advanced in 
spiritual life, he can become agitated by the sex impulse. Although 
during the rainy season the high mountains are splashed by torrents of 
rain, they do not change; similarly, a person who is advanced in Kåñëa 
consciousness, even if put into difficulties, is not embarrassed. A person 
who is spiritually advanced accepts any adverse condition of life as the 
mercy of the Lord, and thus he is completely eligible to enter into the 
spiritual kingdom. 
In the rainy season some of the roads are not frequently used, and they 
become covered with long grasses. These roads are exactly like a 
brähmaëa who is not accustomed to studying and practicing the 
reformatory methods of the Vedic injunctions—he becomes covered 
with the long grasses of mäyä. In that condition, forgetful of his 
constitutional nature, he forgets his position of eternal servitorship to 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
180
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By being deviated by the seasonal 
overgrowth of long grasses created by mäyä, a person identifies himself 
with mäyic production and succumbs to illusion, forgetting his spiritual 
life. 
During the rainy season, lightning appears in one group of clouds and 
then immediately in another group of clouds. This phenomenon is 
compared to a lusty woman who does not fix her mind on one man. A 
cloud is compared to a qualified person because it pours rain and gives 
sustenance to many people; a man who is qualified similarly gives 
sustenance to many living creatures, such as family members or many 
workers in business. Unfortunately, his whole life can be disturbed by a 
wife who divorces him; when the husband is disturbed, the whole family 
is ruined, the children are dispersed or the business is closed, and 
everything is affected. It is therefore recommended that a woman 
desiring to advance in Kåñëa consciousness live peacefully with a 
husband and that the couple not separate under any condition. The 
husband and wife should control sex indulgence and concentrate their 
minds on Kåñëa consciousness so their life may be successful. After all, 
in the material world a man requires a woman and a woman requires a 
man. When they are combined, they should live peacefully in Kåñëa 
consciousness and should not be restless like the lightning, flashing from 
one group of clouds to another. 
Sometimes, in addition to the roaring thunder of the clouds, there is an 
appearance of a rainbow, which stands as a bow without a string. 
Actually, a bow is in the curved position, being tied at its two ends by 
the bowstring; but in the rainbow there is no such string, and yet it rests 
in the sky so beautifully. Similarly, when the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead descends to this material world, He appears just like an 
ordinary human being, but He is not resting on any material condition. 
In the Bhagavad-gétä, the Lord says that He appears by His internal 
potency, which is free from the bondage of the external potency. What 
is bondage for the ordinary creature is freedom for the Personality of 
Godhead. In the rainy season, the moonlight is covered by clouds but is 
visible at intervals. It sometimes appears that the moon is moving with 
the movement of the clouds, but actually the moon is still; due to the 
clouds it also appears to move. Similarly, for one who has identified 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
181
himself with the moving material world, his actual spiritual luster is 
covered by illusion, and with the movement of material activities he 
thinks that he is moving through different spheres of life. This is due to 
false ego, which is the demarcation between spiritual and material 
existence, just as the moving cloud is the demarcation between 
moonlight and darkness. In the rainy season, when the clouds appear for 
the first time, the peacocks dance with joy upon seeing them. The 
peacocks can be compared to persons who are very harassed in the 
materialistic way of life. If they can find the association of a person 
engaged in the loving devotional service of the Lord, they become 
enlightened and dance just like peacocks. We have practical experience 
of this: many of our students were dry and morose previous to their 
coming to Kåñëa consciousness, but having come into contact with 
devotees, they are now dancing like jubilant peacocks. 
Plants and creepers grow by drinking water from the ground. Similarly, a 
person practicing austerities becomes dry, but after the austere 
performances are completed and he gets the result, he begins to enjoy 
life in sense gratification with family, society, love, home and other 
paraphernalia. He becomes jolly, like newly grown plants and grass. 
Sometimes it is seen that cranes and ducks meander continually on the 
banks of the lakes and rivers, although the banks are filled with muddy 
garbage and thorny creepers. Similarly, persons who are householders 
without Kåñëa consciousness are constantly tarrying in material life, in 
spite of all kinds of inconveniences. In family life, or any life, one 
cannot be perfectly happy without being Kåñëa conscious. Çréla 
Narottama däsa Öhäkura prays that he will have the association of a 
person—either a householder or a man in the renounced order of life—
who is engaged in the transcendental loving service of the Lord and is 
always crying the holy name of Lord Caitanya. For the materialistic 
person, worldly affairs become too aggressive, whereas to a person who is 
in Kåñëa consciousness, everything appears to be happily situated. 
The barriers around the agricultural field sometimes break due to heavy 
torrents of rain. Similarly, the unauthorized atheistic propaganda in the 
Age of Kali breaks the boundary of the Vedic injunctions. Thus people 
gradually degenerate to godlessness. In the rainy season, the clouds, 
tossed by the wind, deliver water which is welcomed like nectar. When 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
182
the Vedic followers, the brähmaëas, inspire rich men like kings and 
members of the wealthy mercantile community to give charity in the 
performance of great sacrifices, the distribution of such wealth is also 
nectarean. The four sections of human society, namely the brähmaëas, 
the kñatriyas, the vaiçyas and the çüdras, are meant to live peacefully in a 
cooperative mood; this is possible when they are guided by expert Vedic 
brähmaëas who perform sacrifices and distribute wealth equally. 
Våndävana forest improved from the rains and was replete with ripened 
dates, mangoes, blackberries and other fruits. Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, along with His boyfriends and Lord Balaräma, 
entered the forest to enjoy the new seasonal atmosphere. The cows, 
being fed by new grasses, became very healthy, and their milk bags were 
all very full. When Lord Kåñëa called them by name, they immediately 
came to Him out of affection, and in their joyful condition the milk 
flowed from their bags. Lord Kåñëa was very pleased when passing 
through the Våndävana forest by the site of Govardhana Hill. On the 
bank of the Yamunä He saw all the trees decorated with beehives 
pouring honey. There were many waterfalls on Govardhana Hill, and 
their flowing made a nice sound. Kåñëa heard them as He looked into 
the caves of the hill. When the rainy season was not ended completely 
but was gradually turning to autumn, sometimes, especially when there 
was rainfall within the forest, Kåñëa and His companions would sit 
under a tree or within the caves of Govardhana Hill and enjoy eating 
the ripened fruits and talking with great pleasure. When Kåñëa and 
Balaräma were in the forest, mother Yaçodä used to send Them some 
fruits, sweetmeats and rice mixed with yogurt. Kåñëa would take them, 
sit down on a slab of stone on the bank of the Yamunä, and call His 
friends to join Him. While Kåñëa and Balaräma and Their friends were 
eating, they watched the cows, calves and bulls. The cows appeared to be 
a little tired from standing with their heavy milk bags. By sitting and 
chewing grass, they became happy, and Kåñëa was pleased to see them. 
He was proud to see the beauty of the forest due to the rainy season, 
which was nothing but the manifestation of His own energy. At such 
times Kåñëa would praise nature’s special activities during the rainy 
season. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä that the material energy, or 
nature, is not independent in its actions. Nature is acting under the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
183
superintendence of Kåñëa. This is confirmed in the Brahma-saàhitä, 
which states that material nature, known as Durgä, is acting as the 
shadow of Kåñëa. Whatever order is sent from Kåñëa, material nature 
obeys. Therefore the natural beauty created by the rainy season was 
acted out according to the indications of Kåñëa, who thus felt very proud 
of material nature’s beautiful activities. 
While Kåñëa and Balaräma were enjoying the gifts of the rainy season in 
this way, the autumn season gradually arrived, when all the water 
reservoirs become very clean, and when pleasing and refreshing air 
blows everywhere. With the appearance of autumn, the sky was 
completely cleared of all clouds, and it recovered its natural blue color. 
The blooming lotus flower in the clear water in the forest appeared like 
a person who has fallen down from yoga practice but again has become 
beautiful by resuming his spiritual life. Everything becomes naturally 
beautiful with the appearance of the autumn season. Similarly, when a 
materialistic person takes to Kåñëa consciousness and spiritual life, he 
also becomes as clear as the sky and water in autumn. 
The autumn season takes away the rolling of dark clouds in the sky as 
well as the polluted water. Filthy conditions on the ground also become 
cleansed. Similarly, a person who takes to Kåñëa consciousness 
immediately becomes cleansed of all dirty things within and without. 
Kåñëa is therefore known as Hari. Hari means “he who takes away.” 
Kåñëa immediately takes away all unclean habits from anyone who takes 
to Kåñëa consciousness. The clouds of autumn are white, for they do not 
carry any water. Similarly, a retired man, being freed from all 
responsibility of family affairs (namely, maintaining the home, wife and 
children) and taking completely to Kåñëa consciousness, becomes freed 
from all anxieties and looks as white as clouds in autumn. Sometimes in 
autumn the falls come down from the top of the hill to supply clean 
water, and sometimes they stop. Similarly, sometimes great saintly 
persons distribute clear knowledge, and sometimes they are silent. The 
small ponds, which were filled with water because of the rainy season, 
gradually dry up in autumn. As for the small aquatics living in the 
reservoirs, they cannot understand that their ponds are diminishing day 
by day, as the materially engrossed persons cannot understand that their 
duration of life is being reduced day by day. Such persons are engaged in 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
184
maintaining cows, property, children, wife, society and friendship. Due 
to the reduced water and scorching heat from the sun in the autumn 
season, the small creatures living in small reservoirs of water are very 
much disturbed; they are exactly like uncontrolled persons who are 
always unhappy from being unable to enjoy life or maintain their family 
members. The muddy earth gradually dries up, and newly grown fresh 
vegetation begins to wither. Similarly, for one who has taken to Kåñëa 
consciousness, desire for family enjoyment gradually dries up. 
Because of the appearance of the autumn season, the water of the ocean 
becomes calm and quiet, just as a person developed in self-realization 
becomes free from disturbance by the three modes of material nature. In 
autumn, farmers save the water within the fields by building strong walls 
so that the water contained within the field cannot run out. There is 
hardly any hope for new rainfalls; therefore they want to save whatever 
is in the field. Similarly, a person who is actually advanced in self-
realization protects his energy by controlling the senses. It is advised 
that after the age of fifty one should retire from family life and should 
conserve the energy of the body for utilization in the advancement of 
Kåñëa consciousness. Unless one is able to control the senses and engage 
them in the transcendental loving service of Mukunda, there is no 
possibility of salvation. 
During the daytime in autumn, the sun is very scorching, but at night, 
due to the clear moonshine, people get relief from the day’s fatigue. If a 
person takes shelter of Mukunda, or Kåñëa, he can be saved from the 
fatigue of misidentifying the body with the self. Mukunda, or Kåñëa, is 
also the source of solace for the damsels of Våndävana. The damsels of 
Vrajabhümi are always suffering because of separation from Kåñëa. 
When they meet Kåñëa during the moonlit autumn night, their fatigue 
of separation is also satiated. When the sky is clear of all clouds, the stars 
at night shine very beautifully; similarly, when a person is actually 
situated in Kåñëa consciousness, he is cleared of all dirty things, and he 
becomes as beautiful as the stars in the autumn sky. Although the Vedas 
contain instructions for pursuing knowledge (jïäna), for practicing 
mystic yoga and for engaging in karmic activities in the form of 
sacrifices, the ultimate purpose of the Vedas is stated in the Bhagavad-
gétä: one has to accept Kåñëa consciousness after thoroughly studying 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
185
the Vedas. Therefore the clean heart of a devotee in Kåñëa 
consciousness can be compared to the clean sky of the autumn season. 
During autumn, the moon looks very bright along with the stars in the 
clear sky. Lord Kåñëa Himself appeared in the sky of the Yadu dynasty, 
and He was exactly like the moon surrounded by the stars, or the 
members of the Yadu dynasty. When there are ample blooming flowers 
in the gardens in the forest, the fresh, aromatic breeze gives a great relief 
to the person who has suffered during the summer and rainy seasons. 
Unfortunately, such breezes could not give any relief to the gopés 
because of their hearts’ dedication to Kåñëa. People in general might 
have taken pleasure in that nice autumn breeze, but the gopés, not being 
embraced by Kåñëa, were not very satisfied. 
On arrival of the autumn season, all the cows, deer, birds and females in 
general become pregnant, because in that season all the husbands 
generally become impelled by sex desire. Such pregnant females are 
exactly like the transcendentalists who, by the grace of the Supreme 
Lord, are bestowed with the benediction of their destinations in life. 
Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé has instructed in his Upadeçämåta that one should 
execute devotional service with great enthusiasm, patience and 
conviction and should follow the rules and regulations, keep oneself 
clean from material contamination and stay in the association of 
devotees. By following these six principles, one is sure to achieve the 
desired result of devotional service. For him who patiently follows the 
regulative principles of devotional service, the time will undoubtedly 
come when he will achieve the desired result, as the females reap results 
by becoming pregnant. 
During the autumn, the lotus flowers in the lakes grow in large numbers 
because of the absence of lilies; both the lilies and the lotus flowers grow 
by sunshine, but during the autumn season the scorching sunshine helps 
only the lotus. This is compared to a country where the king or the 
government is strong: the unwanted elements like thieves and robbers 
cannot prosper. When the citizens become confident that they will not 
be attacked by robbers, they develop with great satisfaction. A strong 
government is compared to the scorching sunshine in the autumn 
season, the lilies are compared to unwanted persons like robbers, and the 
lotus flowers are compared to the satisfied citizens. During autumn, the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
186
fields become filled with ripened grains. At that time, the people become 
happy over the harvest and observe various ceremonies, such as 
Navänna—the offering of new grains to the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. The new grains are first offered to the Deities in various 
temples, and all are invited to take sweet rice made with these new 
grains. There are other religious ceremonies and methods of worship, 
particularly in Bengal, where the greatest of all such ceremonies is held, 
called Durgä-püjä. 
In Våndävana the autumn season was very beautiful then because of the 
presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa and Balaräma. 
The mercantile community, the royal order and great sages were free to 
move about in order to achieve their desired benedictions. Similarly, the 
transcendentalists, when freed from the encagement of the material 
body, also achieve their desired goal. During the rainy season, the 
mercantile community cannot move from one place to another and so 
do not get their desired profit. Nor can the royal order go from one place 
to another to collect taxes from the people. As for saintly persons, who 
must travel to preach transcendental knowledge, they also are restrained 
by the rainy season. But during the autumn, all of them leave their 
confines. In the case of the transcendentalist, be he a jïäné, a yogé or a 
devotee, because of the material body he cannot actually enjoy spiritual 
achievement. But as soon as he gives up the body, or after death, the 
jïäné merges into the spiritual effulgence of the Supreme Lord, the yogé 
transfers himself to the various higher planets, and the devotee goes to 
the planet of the Supreme Lord, Goloka Våndävana, or the Vaikuëöhas, 
and thus enjoys his eternal spiritual life. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twentieth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Description of Autumn.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
187
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE 
The Gopés Attracted by the Flute 
 
With the arrival of the beautiful autumn season, the waters in the lakes 
and rivers became as clear as crystal and filled with fragrant lotus 
flowers, and breezes blew very pleasantly. At that time, Kåñëa entered 
the forest of Våndävana with the cows and cowherd boys. Kåñëa was 
very much pleased with the atmosphere of the forest, where flowers 
bloomed and bees and drones hummed very jubilantly. While the birds, 
trees and plants were all looking very happy, Kåñëa, tending the cows 
and accompanied by Çré Balaräma and the cowherd boys, began to 
vibrate His transcendental flute. After hearing the vibration of the flute 
of Kåñëa, the gopés in Våndävana remembered Him and began to talk 
amongst themselves about how nicely Kåñëa was playing His flute. When 
the gopés were describing the sweet vibration of Kåñëa’s flute, they also 
remembered their pastimes with Him; thus their minds became 
disturbed, and they were unable to describe completely the beautiful 
vibrations. While discussing the transcendental vibration, they 
remembered also how Kåñëa dressed, decorated with a peacock feather 
on His head, just like a dancing actor, and with blue flowers pushed over 
His ear. His garment glowed yellow-gold, and He was garlanded with a 
vaijayanté necklace. Dressed in such an attractive way, Kåñëa filled up 
the holes of His flute with the nectar emanating from His lips. So they 
remembered Him, entering the forest of Våndävana, which is always 
glorified by the footprints of Kåñëa and His companions. 
Kåñëa was very expert in playing the flute, and the gopés were captivated 
by the sound vibration, which was attractive not only to them but to all 
living creatures who heard it. One of the gopés told her friends, “The 
highest perfection of the eyes is to see Kåñëa and Balaräma entering the 
forest and playing Their flutes and tending the cows with Their friends.” 
Persons who are constantly engaged in the transcendental meditation of 
seeing Kåñëa, internally and externally, by thinking of Him playing the 
flute, entering the Våndävana forest and tending the cows with the 
cowherd boys have really attained the perfection of samädhi. Samädhi 
(trance) means absorption of all the activities of the senses in a 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
188
particular object, and the gopés indicate that the pastimes of Kåñëa are 
the perfection of all meditation and samädhi. It is also confirmed in the 
Bhagavad-gétä that anyone who is always absorbed in the thought of 
Kåñëa is the topmost of all yogés. 
Another gopé expressed her opinion that Kåñëa and Balaräma, while 
tending the cows, appeared just like actors going to play on a dramatic 
stage. Kåñëa was dressed in glowing garments of yellow, Balaräma in 
blue, and They held new twigs of mango tree, peacock feathers and 
bunches of flowers in Their hands. Dressed with garlands of lotus 
flowers, They were sometimes singing very sweetly among Their friends. 
One gopé told her friend, “How is it Kåñëa and Balaräma are looking so 
beautiful?” Another gopé said, “My dear friends, we cannot even think of 
His bamboo flute—what sort of pious activities did it execute so that it 
is now enjoying the nectar of the lips of Kåñëa, which is actually the 
property of us gopés?” Kåñëa sometimes kisses the gopés; therefore the 
transcendental nectar of His lips is available only to them. So the gopés 
asked, “How is it possible that the flute, which is nothing but a bamboo 
rod, is always engaged in enjoying the nectar from Kåñëa’s lips? Because 
the flute is engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord, the mother and 
the father of the flute must be happy.” 
The lakes and the rivers are considered to be the mothers of the trees 
because the trees live simply by drinking water. So the waters of the 
lakes and rivers of Våndävana were in a happy mood, full of blooming 
lotus flowers, because the waters were thinking, “How is it that our son, 
the bamboo rod, is enjoying the nectar of Kåñëa’s lips?” The bamboo 
trees standing by the banks of the rivers and the lakes were also happy to 
see their descendant so engaged in the service of the Lord, just as 
persons who are advanced in transcendental knowledge take pleasure in 
seeing their descendants engage in the service of the Lord. The trees 
were overwhelmed with joy and were incessantly yielding honey, which 
flowed from the beehives hanging on the branches. 
Another gopé spoke thus to her friend about Kåñëa: “Dear friend, our 
Våndävana is proclaiming the glories of this entire earth because this 
planet is glorified by the lotus footprints of the son of Devaké. Besides 
that, when Govinda plays His flute, the peacocks immediately become 
mad, as if they had heard the rumbling of a new cloud. When all the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
189
animals and trees and plants, either on the top of Govardhana Hill or in 
the valley, see the dancing of the peacocks, they all stand still and listen 
to the transcendental sound of the flute with great attention. We think 
that this boon is not possible or available on any other planet.” 
Although the gopés were village cowherd women and girls, they had 
extensive Vedic knowledge. Such is the effect of Vedic civilization. 
People in general would learn the highest truths of the Vedas simply by 
hearing from authoritative sources. 
Another gopé said, “My dear friends, just see the deer! Although they are 
dumb animals, they have approached the son of Mahäräja Nanda, Kåñëa. 
Not only are they attracted by the dress of Kåñëa and Balaräma, but as 
soon as they hear the playing of the flute, the deer, along with their 
husbands, offer respectful obeisances unto the Lord by looking at Him 
with great affection.” The gopés were envious of the deer because the 
deer were able to offer their service to Kåñëa along with their husbands. 
The gopés thought themselves not so fortunate because whenever they 
wanted to go to Kåñëa, their husbands were not very happy. 
Another gopé said, “My dear friends, Kåñëa is so nicely dressed that He 
appears to be the impetus to various kinds of ceremonies held by the 
womenfolk. Even the wives of the denizens of heaven become attracted 
after hearing the transcendental sound of His flute. Although they are 
traveling in the air in their airplanes, enjoying the company of their 
husbands, on hearing the sound of Kåñëa’s flute, they immediately 
become perturbed. Their hair is loosened, and their tight belts are 
slackened.” This means that the transcendental sound of the flute of 
Kåñëa extended to all corners of the universe. Also, it is significant that 
the gopés knew about the different kinds of airplanes flying in the sky. 
Another gopé said to her friends, “My dear friends, the cows are also 
charmed as soon as they hear the transcendental sound of the flute of 
Kåñëa. It sounds to them like the pouring of nectar, and they 
immediately spread their long ears just to catch the liquid nectar of the 
flute. As for the calves, they are seen with the nipples of their mothers 
pressed in their mouths, but they cannot suck the milk. They remain 
struck with devotion, and tears glide down their eyes, illustrating vividly 
how they are embracing Kåñëa heart to heart.” These phenomena 
indicate that even the cows and calves in Våndävana knew how to cry 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
190
for Kåñëa and embrace Him heart to heart. Actually, the perfection of 
Kåñëa consciousness can be culminated in the shedding of tears from the 
eyes. 
Another young gopé told her mother, “My dear mother, the birds, who 
are all looking at Kåñëa playing on His flute, are sitting very attentively 
on the branches and twigs of different trees. From their features it 
appears that they have forgotten everything and are engaged only in 
hearing Kåñëa’s flute. This proves that they are not ordinary birds; they 
are great sages and devotees, and just to hear Kåñëa’s flute they have 
appeared in Våndävana forest as birds.” Great sages and scholars are 
interested in Vedic knowledge, but the essence of Vedic knowledge is 
stated in the Bhagavad-gétä: vedaiç ca sarvair aham eva vedyaù [Bg. 15.15]. 
Through the knowledge of the Vedas, Kåñëa has to be understood. From 
the behavior of these birds, it appeared that they were great scholars in 
Vedic knowledge and that they took to Kåñëa’s transcendental vibration 
and rejected all branches of Vedic knowledge. Even the river Yamunä, 
being desirous to embrace the lotus feet of Kåñëa after hearing the 
transcendental vibration of His flute, broke her fierce waves to flow very 
nicely with lotus flowers in her hands, just to present flowers to 
Mukunda with deep feeling. 
The scorching heat of the autumn sunshine was sometimes intolerable, 
and therefore the clouds in the sky appeared in sympathy above Kåñëa 
and Balaräma and Their boyfriends while They engaged in blowing 
Their flutes. The clouds served as a soothing umbrella over Their heads 
just to make friendship with Kåñëa. 
The aborigine girls became fully satisfied when they smeared their faces 
and breasts with the dust of Våndävana, which was reddish from the 
touch of Kåñëa’s lotus feet. The aborigine girls had very full breasts, and 
they were also very lusty, but when their lovers touched their breasts, 
the girls were not very much satisfied. When they came out into the 
midst of the forest, they saw that while Kåñëa was walking, some of the 
leaves and creepers of Våndävana had turned reddish from the kuìkuma 
powder which fell from His lotus feet. His lotus feet are held by the gopés 
on their breasts, which are smeared with kuìkuma powder, but when 
Kåñëa travels in the Våndävana forest with Balaräma and His 
boyfriends, the reddish powder falls on the ground of the Våndävana 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
191
forest. So the lusty aborigine girls, while looking toward Kåñëa playing 
His flute, saw the reddish kuìkuma on the ground and immediately took 
it and smeared it over their faces and breasts. In this way they became 
fully satisfied, although they were not satisfied when their lovers 
touched their breasts. All material lusty desires can be immediately 
satisfied if one comes in contact with Kåñëa consciousness. 
Another gopé began to praise the unique position of Govardhana Hill in 
this way: “How fortunate is this Govardhana Hill, for it is enjoying the 
association of Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma, who are accustomed to walk on 
it. Thus Govardhana is always in touch with the lotus feet of the Lord. 
And because Govardhana Hill is so obliged to Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma, 
it is supplying different kinds of fruits, roots and herbs, as well as very 
pleasing crystal water from its lakes, in presentation to the Lord. The 
best presentation offered by Govardhana Hill, however, is newly grown 
grass for the cows and calves. Govardhana Hill knows how to please the 
Lord by pleasing His most beloved associates, the cows and the cowherd 
boys.” 
Another gopé said, “Everything appears wonderful when Kåñëa and 
Balaräma travel in the forest of Våndävana playing Their flutes and 
making intimate friendship with all kinds of moving and nonmoving 
living creatures. When Kåñëa and Balaräma play on Their 
transcendental flutes, the moving creatures become stunned and stop 
their activities, and the nonmoving living creatures, like trees and 
plants, begin to shiver with ecstasy. These are the wonderful reactions to 
the vibration of the transcendental flutes of Kåñëa and Balaräma.” 
Kåñëa and Balaräma carried binding ropes on Their shoulders and in 
Their hands, just like ordinary cowherd boys. While milking the cows, 
the boys bound their hind legs with a small rope. This rope almost always 
hung from the shoulders of the boys, and it was not absent from the 
shoulders of Kåñëa and Balaräma. In spite of Their being the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, They played exactly like cowherd boys, and 
therefore everything became wonderful and attractive. 
While Kåñëa was engaged in tending the cows in the forest of 
Våndävana or on Govardhana Hill, the gopés in the village were always 
absorbed in thinking of Him and discussing His different pastimes. This 
is the perfect example of Kåñëa consciousness: to somehow or other 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
192
remain always engrossed in thoughts of Kåñëa. The vivid example is 
always present in the behavior of the gopés; therefore Lord Caitanya 
declared that no one can worship the Supreme Lord by any method 
which is better than the method of the gopés. The gopés were not born in 
very high brähmaëa or kñatriya families; they were born in the families 
of vaiçyas, and not in big mercantile communities but in the families of 
cowherd men. They were not very well educated, although they heard all 
sorts of knowledge from the brähmaëas, the authorities of Vedic 
knowledge. The gopés’ only purpose was to remain always absorbed in 
thoughts of Kåñëa. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-first Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“The Gopés Attracted by the Flute.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
193
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO 
Stealing the Garments of the Unmarried Gopé Girls 
 
According to Vedic civilization, unmarried girls from ten to fourteen 
years of age are supposed to worship either Lord Çiva or the goddess 
Durgä in order to get a nice husband. But the unmarried girls of 
Våndävana were already attracted by the beauty of Kåñëa. They were, 
however, engaged in the worship of the goddess Durgä in the beginning 
of the Hemanta season (just prior to the winter season). The first month 
of Hemanta is called Agrahäyana (October-November), and at that time 
all the unmarried gopés of Våndävana began to worship goddess Durgä 
with a vow. They first ate haviñyänna, a kind of food prepared by boiling 
together mung dhal and rice without any spices or turmeric. According 
to Vedic injunction, this kind of food is recommended to purify the body 
before one enacts a ritualistic ceremony. All the unmarried gopés in 
Våndävana used to daily worship goddess Kätyäyané early in the 
morning after taking a bath in the river Yamunä. Kätyäyané is another 
name for goddess Durgä. The goddess is worshiped by preparing a doll 
made of sand from the bank of the Yamunä. It is recommended in the 
Vedic scriptures that a deity may be made from different kinds of 
material elements: it can be painted, made of metal, made of jewels, 
made of wood, earth or stone or can be conceived within the heart of 
the worshiper. The Mäyävädé philosopher takes all these forms of the 
deity to be imaginary, but actually they are accepted in the Vedic 
scriptures to be identical with either the Supreme Lord or a respective 
demigod. 
The unmarried gopés used to prepare the deity of goddess Durgä and 
worship it with candana pulp, garlands, incense, lamps and all kinds of 
presentations—fruits, grains and twigs of plants. After worshiping, it is 
the custom to pray for some benediction. The unmarried girls used to 
pray with great devotion to goddess Kätyäyané, addressing her as follows: 
“O supreme external energy of the Personality of Godhead, O supreme 
mystic power, O supreme controller of this material world, O goddess, 
please be kind to us and arrange for our marriage with the son of Nanda 
Mahäräja, Kåñëa.” The Vaiñëavas generally do not worship any 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
194
demigods. Çréla Narottama däsa Öhäkura has strictly forbidden all 
worship of the demigods for anyone who wants to advance in pure 
devotional service. Yet the gopés, who are beyond compare in their 
affection for Kåñëa, were seen to worship Durgä. The worshipers of 
demigods also sometimes mention that the gopés also worshiped goddess 
Durgä, but we must understand the purpose of the gopés. Generally, 
people worship goddess Durgä for some material benediction. Here, the 
gopés prayed to the goddess to become wives of Lord Kåñëa. The purport 
is that if Kåñëa is the center of activity, a devotee can adopt any means 
to achieve that goal. The gopés could adopt any means to satisfy or serve 
Kåñëa. That was the superexcellent characteristic of the gopés. They 
worshiped goddess Durgä completely for one month in order to have 
Kåñëa as their husband. Every day they prayed for Kåñëa, the son of 
Nanda Mahäräja, to become their husband. 
Early in the morning, the gopés used to go to the bank of the Yamunä to 
take a bath. They would assemble together, holding one another’s hands, 
and loudly sing of the wonderful pastimes of Kåñëa. It is an old system 
among Indian girls and women that when they take a bath in the river 
they place their garments on the bank and dip into the water completely 
naked. The portion of the river where the girls and women bathe was 
strictly prohibited to any male, and this is still the system. The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, knowing the minds of the unmarried young 
gopés, blessed them with their desired objective. They had prayed for 
Kåñëa to become their husband, and Kåñëa wanted to fulfill their desires. 
At the end of the month, Kåñëa, along with His friends, appeared on the 
scene. Another name of Kåñëa is Yogeçvara, or master of all mystic 
powers. By practicing meditation, the yogé can study the psychic 
movement of other men, and certainly Kåñëa could understand the 
desire of the gopés. Appearing on the scene, Kåñëa immediately collected 
all the garments of the gopés, climbed up into a nearby tree, and with a 
smiling face began to speak to them. 
“My dear girls,” He said, “please come here one after another and pray 
for your garments and then take them away. I’m not joking with you. I’m 
just telling the truth. I have no desire to play any joke with you, for you 
are tired from observing the regulative principles for one month by 
worshiping goddess Kätyäyané. Please do not come here all at once. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
195
Come alone; I want to see each of you in your complete beauty, for you 
all have thin waists. I have requested you to come alone. Now please 
comply.” 
When the girls in the water heard such joking words from Kåñëa, they 
began to look at one another and smile. They were very joyous to hear 
such a request from Kåñëa because they were already in love with Him. 
Out of shyness, they looked at one another, but they could not come out 
of the water because they were naked. Due to remaining in the water for 
a long time, they felt cold and were shivering, yet upon hearing the 
pleasing, joking words of Govinda, their minds were perturbed with 
great joy. They told Kåñëa, “Dear son of Nanda Mahäräja, please do not 
joke with us in that way. It is completely unjust to us. You are a very 
respectable boy because You are the son of Nanda Mahäräja, and You 
are very dear to us, but You should not play this joke on us because now 
we are all shivering from the cold water. Kindly deliver our garments 
immediately; otherwise we shall suffer.” They then began to appeal to 
Kåñëa with great submission. “Dear Çyämasundara,” they said, “we are all 
Your eternal servitors. Whatever You order us to do, we are obliged to 
perform without hesitation because we consider it our religious duty. But 
if You insist on putting this proposal to us, which is impossible to 
perform, then certainly we will have to go to Nanda Mahäräja and lodge 
a complaint against You. If Nanda Mahäräja does not take action, then 
we shall tell King Kaàsa about Your misbehavior.” 
Upon hearing this appeal by the unmarried gopés, Kåñëa answered, “My 
dear girls, if you think that you are My eternal servitors and you are 
always ready to execute My order, then My request is that, with your 
smiling faces, you please come here alone, one after another, and take 
away your garments. If you do not come here, however, and if you lodge 
complaints to My father, I shall not care anyway, for I know My father is 
old and cannot take any action against Me.” 
When the gopés saw that Kåñëa was strong and determined, they had no 
alternative but to abide by His order. One after another they came out 
of the water, but because they were completely naked, they tried to 
cover their nakedness by placing their left hand over their pubic area. In 
that posture they were all shivering. Their simple presentation was so 
pure that Lord Kåñëa immediately became pleased with them. All the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
196
unmarried gopés who prayed to Kätyäyané to have Kåñëa as their 
husband were thus satisfied. A woman cannot be naked before any male 
except her husband. The unmarried gopés desired Kåñëa as their 
husband, and He fulfilled their desire in this way. Being pleased with 
them, He took their garments on His shoulder and began to speak as 
follows: “My dear girls, you have committed a great offense by going 
naked in the river Yamunä. Because of this, the predominating deity of 
the Yamunä, Varuëadeva, has become displeased with you. Please, 
therefore, just touch your foreheads with folded palms and bow down 
before the demigod Varuëa in order to be excused from this offensive 
act.” The gopés were all simple souls, and whatever Kåñëa said they took 
to be true. In order to be freed from the wrath of Varuëadeva, as well as 
to fulfill the desired end of their vows and ultimately to please their 
worshipable Lord, Kåñëa, they immediately abided by His order. Thus 
they became the greatest lovers of Kåñëa, and His most obedient 
servitors. 
Nothing can compare to the Kåñëa consciousness of the gopés. Actually, 
the gopés did not care for Varuëa or any other demigod; they only 
wanted to satisfy Kåñëa. Kåñëa became very ingratiated and satisfied by 
the simple dealings of the gopés, and He immediately delivered their 
respective garments, one after another. Although Kåñëa cheated the 
young unmarried gopés and made them stand naked before Him and 
enjoyed joking words with them, and although He treated them just like 
dolls and stole their garments, they were still pleased with Him and 
never lodged complaints against Him. This attitude of the gopés is 
described by Lord Caitanya Mahäprabhu when He prays, “My dear Lord 
Kåñëa, You may embrace Me or trample Me under Your feet, or You may 
make Me brokenhearted by never being present before Me. Whatever 
You like, You can do, because You have complete freedom to act. But in 
spite of all Your dealings, You are My Lord eternally, and I have no 
other worshipable object.” This is the attitude of the gopés toward Kåñëa. 
Lord Kåñëa was pleased with them, and since they all desired to have 
Him as their husband, He told them, “My dear well-behaved girls, I know 
of your desire for Me and why you worshiped goddess Kätyäyané, and I 
completely approve of your action. Anyone whose full consciousness is 
always absorbed in Me, even if in lust, is elevated. As a fried seed cannot 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
197
fructify, so any desire in connection with My loving service cannot 
produce any fruitive result, as in ordinary karma.” 
There is a statement in the Brahma-saàhitä: karmäëi nirdahati kintu ca 
bhakti-bhäjäm [Bs. 5.54]. Everyone is bound by his fruitive activities, but 
the devotees, because they work completely for the satisfaction of the 
Lord, suffer no reactions. Similarly, the gopés’ attitude toward Kåñëa, 
although seemingly lusty, should not be considered to be like the lusty 
desires of ordinary women. The reason is explained by Kåñëa Himself. 
Activities in devotional service to Kåñëa are transcendental to any 
fruitive result. 
“My dear gopés,” Kåñëa continued, “your desire to have Me as your 
husband will be fulfilled because it is with this desire that you worshiped 
goddess Kätyäyané. I promise you that during the next autumn season 
you shall be able to meet with Me, and you shall enjoy Me as your 
husband.” 
Later Kåñëa, in the company of His cowherd boyfriends, took shelter of 
the shade of some trees and became very happy. Thus He addressed the 
inhabitants of Våndävana: “My dear Stoka Kåñëa, My dear Varüthapa, 
My dear Bhadrasena, My dear Sudämä, My dear Subala, My dear Arjuna, 
My dear Viçäla, My dear Åñabha—just look at these most fortunate trees 
of Våndävana. They have dedicated their lives to the welfare of others. 
Individually they are tolerating all kinds of natural disturbances, such as 
hurricanes, torrents of rain, scorching heat and piercing cold, but they 
are very careful to relieve our fatigue and give us shelter. My dear 
friends, I think they are glorified in this birth as trees. They are so 
careful to give shelter to others that they are like noble, highly elevated 
charitable men who never deny charity to one who approaches them. No 
one is denied shelter by these trees. They supply various kinds of 
facilities to human society, such as leaves, flowers, fruit, shade, roots, 
bark, flavor extracts and fuel. They are the perfect example of noble life. 
They are like a noble person who has sacrificed everything possible—his 
body, mind, activities, intelligence and words—for the welfare of all 
living entities.” 
Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead walked on the bank of the 
Yamunä, touching the leaves of the trees and their fruits, flowers and 
twigs, and praising their glorious welfare activities. Different people may 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
198
accept certain welfare activities to be beneficial for human society, 
according to their own views, but the welfare activity that can be 
rendered to people in general, for eternal benefit, is the spreading of the 
Kåñëa consciousness movement. Everyone should be prepared to 
propagate this movement. As instructed by Lord Caitanya, one should 
be humbler than the grass on the ground and more tolerant than the 
tree. The toleration of the tree is explained by Lord Kåñëa Himself, and 
those who are engaged in the preaching of Kåñëa consciousness should 
learn lessons from the teachings of Lord Kåñëa and Lord Caitanya 
through Their direct disciplic succession. 
While passing through the forest of Våndävana on the bank of the 
Yamunä, Kåñëa sat down at a beautiful spot and allowed the cows to 
drink the cold and transparent water of the Yamunä. Being fatigued, the 
cowherd boys, Kåñëa and Balaräma also drank. After seeing the young 
gopés bathing in the Yamunä, Kåñëa passed the rest of the morning with 
the boys. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-second Chapter of 
Kåñëa, “Stealing the Garments of the Unmarried Gopé Girls.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
199
CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE 
Delivering the Wives of  
the Brähmaëas Who Performed Sacrifices 
 
The morning passed, and the cowherd boys were very hungry because 
they had not eaten breakfast. They immediately approached Kåñëa and 
Balaräma and said, “Dear Kåñëa and Balaräma, You are both all-
powerful; You can kill many, many demons, but today we are much 
afflicted with hunger, and this is disturbing us. Please arrange for 
something that will mitigate our hunger.” 
Requested in this way by Their friends, Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma 
immediately showed compassion on certain wives of brähmaëas who 
were performing sacrifices. These wives were great devotees of the Lord, 
and Kåñëa took this opportunity to bless them. He said, “My dear 
friends, please go to the house of the brähmaëas nearby. They are now 
engaged in performing Vedic sacrifices known as Äìgirasa, for they 
desire elevation to the heavenly planets. All of you please go to them.” 
Then Lord Kåñëa warned His friends, “These brähmaëas are not 
Vaiñëavas. They cannot even chant Our names, Kåñëa and Balaräma. 
They are very busy in chanting the Vedic hymns, although the purpose 
of Vedic knowledge is to find Me. But because they are not attracted by 
the names of Kåñëa and Balaräma, you had better not ask them for 
anything in My name. Better ask for some charity in the name of 
Balaräma.” 
Charity is generally given to high-class brähmaëas, but Kåñëa and 
Balaräma did not appear in a brähmaëa family. Balaräma was known as 
the son of Vasudeva, a kñatriya, and Kåñëa was known in Våndävana as 
the son of Nanda Mahäräja, who was a vaiçya. Neither belonged to the 
brähmaëa community. Therefore, Kåñëa considered that the brähmaëas 
engaged in performing sacrifices might not be induced to give charity to 
a kñatriya and vaiçya. “But at least if you utter the name of Balaräma, 
they may prefer to give in charity to a kñatriya rather than to Me, 
because I am only a vaiçya.” 
Being thus ordered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all the boys 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
200
went to the brähmaëas and began to ask for some charity. They 
approached them with folded hands and fell down on the ground to 
offer respect. “O earthly gods, kindly hear us who are ordered by Lord 
Kåñëa and Balaräma. We hope you know Them both very well, and we 
wish you all good fortune. Kåñëa and Balaräma are tending cows nearby, 
and we have accompanied Them. We have come to ask for some food 
from you. You are all brähmaëas and knowers of religious principles, and 
if you think that you should give us charity, then give us some food, and 
we all shall eat along with Kåñëa and Balaräma. You are the most 
respectable brähmaëas within the human society, and you are expected 
to know all the principles of religious procedure.” 
Although the boys were village boys and were not expected to be learned 
in all the Vedic principles of religious ritual, they hinted that because of 
their association with Kåñëa and Balaräma, they knew all those 
principles. By addressing the brähmaëas as “knowers of all religious 
principles,” the boys expressed the point of view that when the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa and Balaräma, were asking for food, the 
brähmaëas should immediately deliver some without hesitation, because, 
as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, one should perform yajïa (sacrifices) only 
for the satisfaction of Viñëu. 
The boys continued, “Lord Viñëu as Kåñëa and Balaräma is standing 
waiting, and you should immediately deliver whatever food you have in 
your stock.” They also explained to the brähmaëas when food is to be 
accepted and when it is not to be accepted. Generally, the Vaiñëavas, or 
pure devotees of the Lord, do not take part in ordinary sacrificial 
performances. But they know very well the ceremonials called dékñä, 
paçu-saàsthä and sauträmaëi. One is permitted to take food after the 
procedure of dékñä and before the animal sacrificial ceremony and the 
sauträmaëi, or ceremony in which liquors are also offered. The boys said, 
“We can take your food at the present stage of your ceremony, for now it 
will not be prohibited. So you can deliver us the food.” 
Although the companions of Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma were simple 
cowherd boys, they were in a position to dictate even to the high-class 
brähmaëas engaged in the Vedic rituals of sacrifice. But the smärta-
brähmaëas, who were simply sacrificial-minded, could not understand 
the dictation of the transcendental devotees of the Lord. They could not 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
201
even appreciate the begging of the Supreme Lord, Kåñëa and Balaräma. 
Although they heard all the arguments on behalf of Kåñëa and 
Balaräma, they did not care for them, and they refused to speak to the 
boys. Despite being highly elevated in the knowledge of Vedic sacrificial 
rites, all such nondevotee brähmaëas, although they think of themselves 
as very highly elevated, are ignorant, foolish persons. All their activities 
are childish because they do not know the purpose of the Vedas, as it is 
explained in the Bhagavad-gétä: to understand Kåñëa. In spite of their 
advancement in Vedic knowledge and rituals, they do not understand 
Kåñëa; therefore their knowledge of the Vedas is useless. Lord Caitanya, 
therefore, gave His valuable opinion that although a person may not be 
born in a brähmaëa family, if he knows Kåñëa or the science of Kåñëa 
consciousness he is more than a brähmaëa, and he is quite fit to become 
a spiritual master. 
There are various details to be observed in the performance of sacrifices. 
They are known as deça, place; käla, time; påthag-dravya, the different 
detailed paraphernalia; mantra, hymns; tantra, scriptural evidences; agni, 
fire; åtvik, learned performers of sacrifices; devatä, the demigods; 
yajamäna, the performer of the sacrifices; kratu, the sacrifice itself; and 
dharma, the procedures. All these are for satisfying Kåñëa. It is 
confirmed that He is the actual enjoyer of all sacrifices because He is 
directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the Supreme Absolute 
Truth, beyond the conception or speculation of material senses. He is 
present just like an ordinary human boy. But for persons who identify 
themselves with the body, it is very difficult to understand Him. The 
brähmaëas were very interested in the comforts of this material body 
and in elevation to the higher planetary residences called svarga-väsa. 
They were therefore completely unable to understand the position of 
Kåñëa. 
When the boys saw that the brähmaëas would not reply to them even 
with a simple yes or no, they became very disappointed. They then 
returned to Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma and explained everything that had 
happened. After hearing their statements, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead smiled. He told them that they should not be sorry for being 
refused by the brähmaëas, because that is the way of begging. He 
convinced them that one who is engaged in collecting or begging should 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
202
not think that he will be successful everywhere. He may be unsuccessful 
in some places, but that should not be cause for disappointment. Lord 
Kåñëa then asked all the boys to go again, but this time to the wives of 
those brähmaëas engaged in sacrifices. He also informed them that these 
wives were great devotees. “They are always absorbed in thinking of Us. 
Go there and ask for some food in My name and the name of Balaräma, 
and I am sure that they will deliver you as much food as you desire.” 
Carrying out Kåñëa’s order, the boys immediately went to the wives of 
the brähmaëas. They found the wives sitting inside a house. They were 
very beautifully decorated with ornaments. After offering them all 
respectful obeisances, the boys said, “Dear mothers, please accept our 
humble obeisances and hear our statement. May we inform you that 
Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma are nearby. They have come here with the 
cows, and you may know also that we have come here under Their 
instructions. All of us are very hungry; therefore, we have come to you 
for some food. Please give us something to eat for Kåñëa, Balaräma and 
ourselves.” 
Immediately upon hearing this, the wives of the brähmaëas became 
anxious for Kåñëa and Balaräma. These reactions were spontaneous. 
They did not have to be convinced of the importance of Kåñëa and 
Balaräma; immediately upon hearing Their names, they became very 
eager to see Them. Being advanced by thinking of Kåñëa constantly, 
they were performing the greatest form of mystic meditation. All the 
wives then became very busily engaged in filling up different pots with 
nice food. Due to the performance of the sacrifice, the various foods 
were all very palatable. After collecting a feast, they prepared to go to 
Kåñëa, their most beloved object, exactly in the way rivers flow to the 
sea. 
For a long time the wives had been eager to see Kåñëa. However, when 
they were preparing to leave home to go see Him, their husbands, 
fathers, sons and relatives asked them not to go. But the wives did not 
comply. When a devotee is called by the attraction of Kåñëa, he does not 
care for bodily ties. The women entered the forest of Våndävana on the 
bank of the Yamunä, which was verdant with vegetation and newly 
grown vines and flowers. Within that forest they saw Kåñëa and 
Balaräma engaged in tending the cows along with Their very 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
203
affectionate boyfriends. 
The brähmaëas’ wives saw Kåñëa with a blackish complexion, wearing a 
garment that glittered like gold. He wore a nice garland of forest flowers 
and a peacock feather on His head. He was also painted with the 
minerals found in Våndävana, and He looked exactly like a dancing 
actor on a theatrical stage. They saw Him keeping one hand on the 
shoulder of His friend, and in His other hand He was holding a lotus 
flower. His ears were decorated with lilies, He wore marks of tilaka, and 
He was smiling charmingly. With their very eyes the wives of the 
brähmaëas saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, of whom they had 
heard so much, who was so dear to them, and in whom their minds were 
always absorbed. Now they saw Him eye to eye and face to face, and 
Kåñëa entered within their hearts through their eyes. 
Within themselves they began to embrace Kåñëa to their hearts’ 
content, and the distress of separation was mitigated immediately. They 
were just like great sages who, by their advancement of knowledge, 
merge into the existence of the Supreme. As the Supersoul living in 
everyone’s heart, Lord Kåñëa could understand their minds; they had 
come to Him despite all the protests of their relatives, fathers, husbands 
and brothers, and despite all the duties of household affairs. They came 
just to see Him, who was their life and soul. They were exactly following 
Kåñëa’s instruction in the Bhagavad-gétä: one should surrender to Him, 
giving up all varieties of occupational and religious duties. He therefore 
began to speak to them, smiling very magnificently. It should be noted in 
this connection that when Kåñëa entered into the wives’ hearts and 
when they embraced Him and felt the transcendental bliss of being 
merged with Him, the Supreme Lord Kåñëa did not lose His identity, nor 
did the individual wives lose theirs. The individuality of both the Lord 
and the wives remained, yet they felt oneness in existence. When a 
lover submits to his lover without any pinch of personal consideration, 
that is called oneness. Lord Caitanya has taught us this feeling of 
oneness in His Çikñäñöaka: Kåñëa may act freely, doing whatever He 
likes, but the devotee should always be in oneness or in agreement with 
His desires. That oneness was exhibited by the wives of the brähmaëas 
in their love for Kåñëa. 
Kåñëa welcomed them with the following words: “My dear wives of the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
204
brähmaëas, you are all very fortunate and welcomed here. Please let Me 
know what can I do for you. Your coming here to see Me, neglecting all 
the restrictions and hindrances of relatives, fathers, brothers and 
husbands, is completely befitting. One who does this actually knows his 
self-interest, because rendering transcendental loving service unto Me, 
without motive or restriction, is actually auspicious for the living 
entities.” 
Lord Kåñëa here confirms that the conditioned soul can reach the 
highest perfectional stage by surrendering to Him. One must give up all 
other responsibilities. This complete surrender unto the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead is the most auspicious path for the conditioned 
soul because the Supreme Lord is the supreme objective of love. 
Everyone is loving his self according to the advancement of his 
knowledge. Ultimately, when a person comes to understand that his self 
is the spirit soul and that the spirit soul is nothing but a part and parcel 
of the Supreme Lord, he recognizes the Supreme Lord as the ultimate 
goal of love and then surrenders unto Him. This surrender is considered 
auspicious for the conditioned soul. Our life, property, home, wife, 
children, house, country, society and all paraphernalia which are very 
dear to us are expansions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is 
the central object of love because He gives us all bliss, expanding 
Himself in so many ways according to our different situations, namely 
bodily, mental or spiritual. 
“My dear wives of the brähmaëas,” Kåñëa said, “you can now return to 
your homes. Engage yourselves in sacrificial activities and in the service 
of your husbands and household affairs so that your husbands will be 
pleased with you and the sacrifice which they have begun will be 
properly executed. After all, your husbands are householders, and 
without your help how can they execute their prescribed duties?” 
The wives of the brähmaëas replied, “Dear Lord, this sort of instruction 
does not befit You. Your eternal promise is that You will always protect 
Your devotees, and now You must fulfill this promise. Anyone who 
comes and surrenders unto You never goes back to the conditioned life 
of material existence. We expect that You will now fulfill Your promise. 
We have surrendered unto Your lotus feet, which are covered by tulasé 
leaves, so we have no desire to give up the shelter of Your lotus feet and 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
205
return to the company of our so-called relatives, friends and society. 
And what shall we do if we return home? Our husbands, brothers, 
fathers, sons, mothers and friends will no longer accept us at home 
because we have already left them all. Therefore we have no shelter to 
return to. Please, therefore, do not ask us to return home, but arrange 
for our stay under Your lotus feet so that we can eternally live under 
Your protection.” 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead replied, “My dear wives of the 
brähmaëas, rest assured that your husbands will not neglect you on your 
return, nor will your brothers, sons, or fathers refuse to accept you. 
Because you are My pure devotees, not only your relatives but also 
people in general, as well as the demigods, will be satisfied with you.” 
Kåñëa is situated as the Supersoul in everyone’s heart. So if someone 
becomes a pure devotee of Lord Kåñëa, he immediately becomes pleasing 
to everyone. The pure devotee of Lord Kåñëa is never inimical to 
anyone, nor can any sane person be an enemy of a pure devotee. 
“Transcendental love for Me does not depend upon bodily connection,” 
Kåñëa said further, “but anyone whose mind is always absorbed in Me 
will surely, very soon, come to Me for My eternal association.” 
After being instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all the 
wives returned home to their respective husbands. Pleased to see their 
wives back home, the brähmaëas sat together with them and executed 
the performances of sacrifices as enjoined in the çästras. According to 
Vedic principle, religious rituals must be executed by the husband and 
wife together. When the brähmaëas’ wives returned, the sacrifice was 
duly and nicely executed. One of the brähmaëas’ wives, however, who 
was forcibly checked from going to see Kåñëa, began to remember Him as 
she heard of His bodily features. Being completely absorbed in His 
thought, she gave up her material body conditioned by the laws of 
nature. 
After the departure of the brähmaëas’ wives, Çré Govinda and His 
cowherd boyfriends enjoyed the food they had offered. In this way the 
ever-joyful Personality of Godhead exhibited His transcendental 
pastimes in the guise of an ordinary human being in order to attract the 
common people to Kåñëa consciousness. With His words and beauty He 
attracted all the cows, cowherd boys and damsels in Våndävana. All of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
206
them together enjoyed the pastimes of the Lord. 
After the return of their wives from Kåñëa, the brähmaëas engaged in 
the performance of sacrifices began to regret their sinful activities in 
refusing food to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They could finally 
understand their mistake; engaged in the performance of Vedic rituals, 
they had neglected the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had 
appeared just like an ordinary human being and asked for some food. 
They began to condemn themselves after seeing the faith and devotion 
of their wives. They regretted very much that, although their wives were 
elevated to the platform of pure devotional service, they themselves 
could not understand even a little bit of how to love and offer 
transcendental loving service to the Supreme Soul. They began to talk 
among themselves: “To hell with our being born brähmaëas! To hell 
with our learning all the Vedic scriptures! To hell with our performing 
great sacrifices and observing all the rules and regulations! To hell with 
our family! To hell with our expert service in performing the rituals 
exactly according to the description of the scriptures! To hell with it all, 
for we have not developed transcendental loving service to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the speculation of the mind, 
body and senses.” 
The learned brähmaëas, expert in Vedic ritualistic performances, were 
properly regretful, because if one does not develop Kåñëa consciousness, 
all discharge of religious duties is simply a waste of time and energy. 
They continued to talk among themselves: “The external energy of 
Kåñëa is so strong that it can create illusion to overcome even the 
greatest mystic yogé. Although we expert brähmaëas are considered to be 
the teachers of all other sections of human society, we also have been 
illusioned by the external energy. Just see how fortunate these women 
are! They have so devotedly dedicated their lives to the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, that they could easily do what is 
ordinarily so difficult: they gave up their family connections, which are 
just like a dark well for the continuation of material miseries.” Women 
in general, being very simple at heart, can very easily take to Kåñëa 
consciousness, and when they develop love of Kåñëa they can easily get 
liberation from the clutches of mäyä, which are very difficult for even 
so-called intelligent and learned men to surpass. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
207
The brähmaëas continued, “According to Vedic injunction, women are 
not allowed to undergo the purificatory process of initiation by the 
sacred thread, nor are they allowed to live as brahmacäriëés in the 
äçrama of the spiritual master, nor are they advised to undergo the strict 
disciplinary procedures, nor are they very expert in discussing the 
philosophy of self-realization. And by nature they are not very pure, nor 
are they very much attached to auspicious activities. Therefore, how 
wonderful it is that these women have developed transcendental love for 
Kåñëa, the Lord of all mystic yogés! They have surpassed all of us in firm 
faith and devotion unto Kåñëa. Being too much attached to the 
materialistic way of life, although we are considered to be masters in all 
purificatory processes, we did not actually know what the goal is. Even 
though we were reminded of Kåñëa and Balaräma by the cowherd boys, 
we disregarded Them. We now think that the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead simply played a trick of mercy on us by sending His friends to 
beg food from us. Otherwise, He had no need to send them. He could 
have satisfied their hunger then and there just by willing to do so.” 
If someone denies the self-sufficiency of Kåñëa on hearing that He was 
tending the cows for His livelihood, or if someone doubts His not being 
in need of the food, thinking that He was actually hungry, then such a 
person should understand that the goddess of fortune is always engaged 
in His service. In this way the goddess can break her faulty habit of 
restlessness. In Vedic scriptures like the Brahma-saàhitä it is stated that 
Kåñëa is served in His abode with great respect by not only one goddess 
of fortune but many thousands. Therefore it is simply illusion for one to 
think that Kåñëa begged food from the brähmaëas. It was actually a trick 
to show them mercy by teaching them that they should accept Him in 
pure devotional service instead of engaging in ritualistic ceremonies. 
The Vedic ceremonial paraphernalia, the suitable place, the suitable 
time, the different grades of articles for performing the ritualistic 
ceremonies, the Vedic hymns, the process of sacrifice, the priest who is 
able to perform the sacrifice, the fire, the demigods, the performer of the 
sacrifice and the religious principles are all meant for understanding 
Kåñëa, for Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the 
Supreme Lord Viñëu and the Lord of all mystic yogés. 
“Because He has appeared as a child in the dynasty of the Yadus, we 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
208
were so foolish that we could not understand that He is the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead,” the brähmaëas said. “But on the other hand, 
we are very proud because we have such exalted wives who have 
developed pure transcendental service of the Lord without being 
shackled by our rigid opposition. Let us therefore offer our respectful 
obeisances unto the lotus feet of Lord Kåñëa, under whose illusory 
energy, called mäyä, we are absorbed in fruitive activities. We therefore 
pray to the Lord to be kind enough to excuse us because we are simply 
captivated by His external energy. We transgressed His order without 
knowing His transcendental glories.” 
The brähmaëas repented for their sinful activities. They wanted to go 
personally to offer their obeisances unto Him, but being afraid of Kaàsa, 
they could not go to Kåñëa and surrender unto Him. In other words, it is 
very difficult for one to surrender fully unto the Personality of Godhead 
without being purified by devotional service. The example of the learned 
brähmaëas and their wives is vivid. The wives of the brähmaëas, because 
they were inspired by pure devotional service, did not care for any kind 
of opposition. They immediately went to Kåñëa. But the brähmaëas, 
although they had come to know the supremacy of the Lord and were 
repenting, were still afraid of King Kaàsa because they were too much 
addicted to fruitive activities. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-third Chapter of 
Kåñëa, “Delivering the Wives of the Brähmaëas Who Performed 
Sacrifices.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
209
CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR 
Worshiping Govardhana Hill 
 
While engaged with the brähmaëas who were too much involved in the 
performance of Vedic sacrifices, Kåñëa and Balaräma also saw that the 
cowherd men were preparing a similar sacrifice in order to pacify Indra, 
the King of heaven, who is responsible for supplying water. As stated in 
the Caitanya-caritämåta, a devotee of Kåñëa has strong and firm faith in 
the understanding that if he is simply engaged in Kåñëa consciousness 
and Kåñëa’s transcendental loving service, then he is freed from all other 
obligations. A pure devotee of Lord Kåñëa doesn’t have to perform any 
of the ritualistic functions enjoined in the Vedas; nor is he required to 
worship any demigods. Being a devotee of Lord Kåñëa, one is understood 
to have performed all kinds of Vedic rituals and all kinds of worship to 
the demigods. One does not develop devotional service for Kåñëa by 
performing the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies or worshiping the demigods, 
but it should be understood that one who is engaged fully in the service 
of the Lord has already fulfilled all Vedic injunctions. 
In order to stop all such activities by His devotees, Kåñëa wanted to 
firmly establish exclusive devotional service during His presence in 
Våndävana. Because He is the omniscient Personality of Godhead, 
Kåñëa knew that the cowherd men were preparing for the Indra 
sacrifice, but as a matter of etiquette He began to inquire with great 
honor and submission from elder personalities like Mahäräja Nanda. 
Kåñëa asked His father, “My dear father, what is this arrangement going 
on for a great sacrifice? What is the result of such a sacrifice, and for 
whom is it meant? How is it performed? Will you kindly let Me know? I 
am very eager to know this procedure, so please explain to Me the 
purpose of this sacrifice.” Upon this inquiry, His father, Nanda 
Mahäräja, remained silent, thinking that his young boy would not be 
able to understand the intricacies of performing the yajïa. Kåñëa, 
however, persisted: “My dear father, for those who are liberal and 
saintly, there is no secrecy. They do not think anyone to be a friend, an 
enemy or a neutral party, because they are always open to everyone. 
And even for those who are not so liberal, nothing should be kept secret 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
210
from the family members and friends, although secrecy may be 
maintained for persons who are inimical. Therefore you cannot keep 
any secrets from Me. All persons are engaged in fruitive activities. Some 
know what these activities are, and they know the result, and some 
execute activities without knowing the purpose or the result. A person 
who acts with full knowledge gets the full result; one who acts without 
knowledge does not get such a perfect result. Therefore, please let Me 
know the purpose of the sacrifice you are going to perform. Is it 
according to Vedic injunction? Or is it simply a popular ceremony? 
Kindly let Me know in detail about the sacrifice.” 
On hearing this inquiry from Kåñëa, Mahäräja Nanda replied, “My dear 
boy, this ceremonial performance is more or less traditional. Because 
rainfall is due to the mercy of King Indra and the clouds are his 
representatives, and because water is so important for our living, we 
must show some gratitude to the controller of this rainfall, Mahäräja 
Indra. We are arranging, therefore, to pacify King Indra, because he has 
very kindly sent us clouds to pour down a sufficient quantity of rain for 
successful agricultural activities. Water is very important: without 
rainfall we cannot farm or produce grain, and without grain we cannot 
live. Therefore rain is necessary for successful religious ceremonies, 
economic development and, ultimately, liberation. So we should not give 
up this traditional ceremonial function; if one gives it up, being 
influenced by lust, greed or fear, then it does not look very good for 
him.” 
After hearing this, Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the 
presence of His father and all the elder cowherd men of Våndävana, 
spoke in such a way as to make heavenly King Indra very angry. He 
suggested that they forgo the sacrifice. His reasons for discouraging the 
sacrifice performed to please Indra were twofold. First, as stated in the 
Bhagavad-gétä, there is no need to worship the demigods for any material 
advancement; all results derived from worshiping the demigods are 
simply temporary, and only those who are less intelligent are interested 
in temporary results. Second, whatever temporary result one derives 
from worshiping the demigods is actually granted by the permission of 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is clearly stated in the 
Bhagavad-gétä: mayaiva vihitän hi tän. Whatever benefit is supposed to 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
211
be derived from the demigods is actually bestowed by the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. Without the permission of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, one cannot bestow any benefit upon others. But 
sometimes the demigods become puffed up by the influence of material 
nature; thinking themselves all in all, they forget the supremacy of the 
Personality of Godhead. In Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is clearly stated that in 
this instance Kåñëa wanted to make King Indra angry. Kåñëa’s advent 
was especially meant for the annihilation of the demons and protection 
of the devotees. King Indra was certainly a devotee, not a demon, but 
because he was puffed up, Kåñëa wanted to teach him a lesson. He first 
made Indra angry by stopping the Indra-püjä, which had been arranged 
by the cowherd men in Våndävana. 
With this purpose in mind, Kåñëa began to talk as if He were an atheist 
supporting the philosophy of Karma-mémäàsä. Advocates of this 
philosophy do not accept the supreme authority of the Personality of 
Godhead. They put forward the argument that if anyone works nicely, 
the result is sure to come. Their opinion is that even if there is a God 
who gives man the result of his fruitive activities, there is no need to 
worship Him because unless man works He cannot bestow any good 
result. They say that instead of worshiping a demigod or God, people 
should give attention to their own duties, and thus the good result will 
surely come. Lord Kåñëa began to speak to His father according to these 
principles of the Karma-mémäàsä philosophy. “My dear father,” He said, 
“I don’t think you need to worship any demigod for the successful 
performance of your agricultural activities. Every living being is born 
according to his past karma and leaves this life simply taking the result 
of his present karma. Everyone is born in different types or species of life 
according to his past activities, and he gets his next birth according to 
the activities of this life. Different grades of material happiness and 
distress, comforts and disadvantages of life, are different results of 
different kinds of activities, from either the past or present life.” 
Mahäräja Nanda and other elder members argued that without satisfying 
the predominating god one cannot derive any good result simply by 
material activities. This is actually the fact. For example, it is sometimes 
found that in spite of first-class medical help and treatment by a first-
class physician, a diseased person dies. It is concluded, therefore, that 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
212
first-class medical treatment or the attempts of a first-class physician are 
not in themselves the cause for curing a patient; there must be the hand 
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Similarly, a father’s and 
mother’s taking care of their children is not the cause of the children’s 
comfort. Sometimes it is found that in spite of all care by the parents, 
the children go bad or succumb to death. Therefore material causes are 
not sufficient for results. There must be the sanction of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. Nanda Mahäräja therefore advocated that in 
order to get good results for agricultural activities, they must satisfy 
Indra, the superintending deity of the rain supply. Lord Kåñëa nullified 
this argument, saying that the demigods give results only to persons who 
have executed their prescribed duties. The demigods cannot give any 
good results to the person who has not executed the prescribed duties; 
therefore demigods are dependent on the execution of duties and are 
not absolute in awarding good results to anyone. So why should one care 
about them? 
“My dear father,” Lord Kåñëa said, “there is no need to worship the 
demigod Indra. Everyone has to achieve the result of his own work. We 
can actually see that one becomes busy according to the natural 
tendency of his work; and according to that natural tendency, all living 
entities—either human beings or demigods—achieve their respective 
results. All living entities achieve higher or lower bodies and create 
enemies, friends or neutral parties only because of their different kinds 
of work. One should be careful to discharge duties according to his 
natural instinct and not divert attention to the worship of various 
demigods. The demigods will be satisfied by proper execution of all 
duties, so there is no need to worship them. Let us, rather, perform our 
prescribed duties very nicely. Actually one cannot be happy without 
executing his proper prescribed duty. One who does not, therefore, 
properly discharge his prescribed duties is compared to an unchaste wife. 
The proper prescribed duty of the brähmaëas is the study of the Vedas; 
the proper duty of the royal order, the kñatriyas, is engagement in 
protecting the citizens; the proper duty of the vaiçya community is 
agriculture, trade and protection of the cows; and the proper duty of the 
çüdras is service to the higher classes, namely the brähmaëas, kñatriyas 
and vaiçyas. We belong to the vaiçya community, and our proper duty is 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
213
to farm, to trade with the agricultural produce, to protect cows or to take 
to banking.” 
Kåñëa identified Himself with the vaiçya community because Nanda 
Mahäräja was protecting many cows and Kåñëa was taking care of them. 
He enumerated four kinds of business engagements for the vaiçya 
community, namely agriculture, trade, protection of cows and banking. 
Although the vaiçyas can take to any of these occupations, the men of 
Våndävana were engaged primarily in the protection of cows. 
Kåñëa further explained to His father, “This cosmic manifestation is 
going on under the influence of three modes of material nature—
goodness, passion and ignorance. These three modes are the causes of 
creation, maintenance and destruction. The cloud is caused by the 
action of the mode of passion; therefore it is the mode of passion which 
causes the rainfall. And after the rainfall, the living entities derive the 
result—success in agricultural work. What, then, has Indra to do in this 
affair? Even if you do not please Indra, what can he do? We do not 
derive any special benefit from Indra. Even if he is there, he pours water 
on the ocean also, where there is no need of water. So he is pouring 
water on the ocean or on the land; it does not depend on our worshiping 
him. As far as we are concerned, we do not need to go to another city or 
village or foreign country. There are palatial buildings in the cities, but 
we are satisfied living in this forest of Våndävana. Our specific 
relationship is with Govardhana Hill and Våndävana forest and nothing 
more. I therefore request you, My dear father, to begin a sacrifice which 
will satisfy the local brähmaëas and Govardhana Hill, and let us have 
nothing to do with Indra.” 
After hearing this statement by Kåñëa, Nanda Mahäräja replied, “My 
dear boy, since You are asking, I shall arrange for a separate sacrifice for 
the local brähmaëas and Govardhana Hill. But for the present let me 
execute this sacrifice known as Indra-yajïa.” 
But Kåñëa replied, “My dear father, don’t delay. The sacrifice you 
propose for Govardhana and the local brähmaëas will take much time. 
Better take the arrangement and paraphernalia you have already made 
for the Indra-yajïa and immediately engage them to satisfy Govardhana 
Hill and the local brähmaëas.” 
Mahäräja Nanda finally relented. The cowherd men then inquired from 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
214
Kåñëa how He wanted the yajïa performed, and Kåñëa gave them the 
following directions. “Prepare very nice foods of all descriptions from 
the grains and ghee collected for the yajïa. Prepare rice, dhal, then 
halavä, pakorä, puré and all kinds of milk preparations, such as sweet rice, 
rabré, sweetballs, sandeça, rasagullä and laòòu, and invite the learned 
brähmaëas who can chant the Vedic hymns and offer oblations to the 
fire. The brähmaëas should be given all kinds of grains in charity. Then 
decorate all the cows and feed them well. After performing this, give 
money in charity to the brähmaëas. As far as the lower animals are 
concerned, such as the dogs, and the lower grades of people, such as the 
caëòälas, or the fifth class of men, who are considered untouchable, they 
also may be given sumptuous prasädam. After nice grasses have been 
given to the cows, the sacrifice known as Govardhana-püjä may 
immediately begin. This sacrifice will very much satisfy Me.” 
In this statement, Lord Kåñëa practically described the whole economy 
of the vaiçya community. In all communities in human society—
including the brähmaëas, kñatriyas, vaiçyas, çüdras, caëòälas, etc.— and 
in the animal kingdom—including the cows, dogs, goats, etc.—everyone 
has his part to play. Each is to work in cooperation for the total benefit 
of all society, which includes not only animate objects but also 
inanimate objects like hills and land. The vaiçya community is 
specifically responsible for the economic improvement of the society by 
producing grains, by giving protection to the cows, by transporting food 
when needed, and by banking and finance. 
From this statement we learn also that although the cats and dogs, 
which have now become so important, are not to be neglected, cow 
protection is actually more important than protection of cats and dogs. 
Another hint we get from this statement is that the caëòälas, or the 
untouchables, are also not to be neglected by the higher classes and 
should be given necessary protection. Everyone is important, but some 
are directly responsible for the advancement of human society and some 
are only indirectly responsible. However, when Kåñëa consciousness is 
there, then everyone’s total benefit is taken care of. 
The sacrifice known as Govardhana-püjä is observed in the Kåñëa 
consciousness movement. Lord Caitanya has recommended that since 
Kåñëa is worshipable, so His land—Våndävana and Govardhana Hill—is 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
215
also worshipable. To confirm this statement, Lord Kåñëa said that 
Govardhana-püjä is as good as worship of Him. From that day, 
Govardhana-püjä has been going on and is known as Annaküöa. In all 
the temples of Våndävana or outside of Våndävana, huge quantities of 
food are prepared in this ceremony and are very sumptuously distributed 
to the general population. Sometimes the food is thrown to the crowds, 
and they enjoy collecting it off the ground. From this we can understand 
that prasädam offered to Kåñëa never becomes polluted or 
contaminated, even if it is thrown on the ground. The people, therefore, 
collect it and eat with great satisfaction. 
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, therefore advised the 
cowherd men to stop the Indra-yajïa and begin the Govardhana-püjä in 
order to chastise Indra, who was very much puffed up at being the 
supreme controller of the heavenly planets. The honest and simple 
cowherd men, headed by Nanda Mahäräja, accepted Kåñëa’s proposal 
and executed in detail everything He advised. They performed 
Govardhana worship and circumambulation of the hill. (Following the 
inauguration of Govardhana-püjä, people in Våndävana still dress nicely 
and assemble near Govardhana Hill to offer worship and 
circumambulate the hill, leading their cows all around.) According to 
the instruction of Lord Kåñëa, Nanda Mahäräja and the cowherd men 
called in learned brähmaëas and began to worship Govardhana Hill by 
chanting Vedic hymns and offering prasädam. The inhabitants of 
Våndävana assembled together, decorated their cows and gave them 
grass. Keeping the cows in front, they began to circumambulate 
Govardhana Hill. The gopés dressed themselves very luxuriantly and sat 
in bull-driven carts, chanting the glories of Kåñëa’s pastimes. Assembled 
there to act as priests for Govardhana-püjä, the brähmaëas offered their 
blessings to the cowherd men and their wives, the gopés. 
When everything was complete, Kåñëa assumed a great transcendental 
form and declared to the inhabitants of Våndävana that He was Himself 
Govardhana Hill in order to convince the devotees that Govardhana 
Hill and Kåñëa Himself are identical. Then Kåñëa began to eat all the 
food offered there. The identity of Kåñëa and Govardhana Hill is still 
honored, and great devotees take rocks from Govardhana Hill and 
worship them exactly as they worship the Deity of Kåñëa in the temples. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
216
The followers of the Kåñëa consciousness movement may therefore 
collect small rocks or pebbles from Govardhana Hill and worship them 
at home, because this worship is as good as Deity worship. The form of 
Kåñëa who began to eat the offerings was separately constituted, and 
Kåñëa Himself, along with the other inhabitants of Våndävana, offered 
obeisances to the Deity as well as Govardhana Hill. In offering 
obeisances to the huge form of Kåñëa and Govardhana Hill, Kåñëa 
declared, “Just see how Govardhana Hill has assumed this huge form and 
is favoring us by accepting all the offerings.” Kåñëa also declared at that 
meeting, “One who neglects the worship of Govardhana-püjä, as I am 
personally conducting it, will not be happy. There are many snakes on 
Govardhana Hill, and persons neglecting the prescribed duty of 
Govardhana-püjä will be bitten by these snakes and killed. In order to 
assure the good fortune of the cows and themselves, all people of 
Våndävana near Govardhana must worship the hill, as prescribed by 
Me.” 
Thus performing the Govardhana-püjä sacrifice, all the inhabitants of 
Våndävana followed the instructions of Kåñëa, the son of Vasudeva, and 
afterwards they returned to their respective homes. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-fourth Chapter of 
Kåñëa, “Worshiping Govardhana Hill.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
217
CHAPTER TWENTY-FIVE 
Devastating Rainfall in Våndävana 
 
When Indra understood that the sacrifice that was to be offered by the 
cowherd men in Våndävana had been stopped by Kåñëa, he became 
angry, and he vented his anger upon the inhabitants of Våndävana, who 
were headed by Nanda Mahäräja, although Indra knew perfectly well 
that Kåñëa was personally protecting them. As the director of different 
kinds of clouds, Indra called for the Säàvartaka. This cloud is invited 
when there is a need to devastate the whole cosmic manifestation. The 
Säàvartaka was ordered by Indra to go over Våndävana and inundate 
the whole area with an extensive flood. Demonically, Indra thought 
himself to be the all-powerful supreme personality. When demons 
become very powerful, they defy the supreme controller, the Personality 
of Godhead. Indra, though not a demon, was puffed up by his material 
position, and he wanted to challenge the supreme controller. He thought 
himself, at least for the time being, as powerful as Kåñëa. Indra said, “Just 
see the impudence of the inhabitants of Våndävana! They are simply 
inhabitants of the forest, but being infatuated with their friend Kåñëa, 
who is nothing but an ordinary human being, they have dared to defy 
the demigods.” 
Kåñëa has declared in the Bhagavad-gétä that the worshipers of the 
demigods are not very intelligent. He has also declared that one has to 
give up all kinds of worship and simply concentrate on Kåñëa 
consciousness. Kåñëa’s invoking the anger of Indra and later on 
chastising him is a clear indication to His devotees that those who are 
engaged in Kåñëa consciousness have no need to worship any demigod, 
even if it is found that the demigod has become angry. Kåñëa gives His 
devotees all protection, and they should completely depend on His 
mercy. 
Indra cursed the action of the inhabitants of Våndävana and said, “By 
defying the authority of the demigods, the inhabitants of Våndävana 
will suffer in material existence. Having neglected the sacrifice to the 
demigods, they cannot cross over the impediments of the ocean of 
material existence.” Indra further declared, “These cowherd men in 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
218
Våndävana have neglected my authority on the advice of this talkative 
boy who is known as Kåñëa. He is nothing but a child, and by believing 
this child, they have enraged me.” Thus he ordered the Säàvartaka 
cloud to go and destroy the prosperity of Våndävana. “The men of 
Våndävana,” said Indra, “have become too puffed up over their material 
opulence and are overconfident due to the presence of their tiny friend, 
Kåñëa. He is simply talkative, childish and unaware of the complete 
cosmic situation, although He is thinking Himself very advanced in 
knowledge. Because they have taken Kåñëa so seriously, they must be 
punished. They should be destroyed with their cows.” In this way Indra 
ordered the Säàvartaka cloud to go to Våndävana and inundate the 
place. 
It is indicated here that in the villages or outside the towns, the 
inhabitants must depend on the cows for their prosperity. When the 
cows are destroyed, the people are destitute of all kinds of opulences. 
When King Indra ordered the Säàvartaka and companion clouds to go 
to Våndävana, the clouds were afraid of doing this mischief. But King 
Indra assured them, “You go ahead, and I will also go, riding on my 
elephant, accompanied by great storms. And I shall apply all my strength 
to punishing the inhabitants of Våndävana.” 
Ordered by King Indra, all the dangerous clouds appeared above 
Våndävana and began to pour water incessantly, with all their strength 
and power. There was constant lightning and thunder, blowing of severe 
wind and incessant falling of rain. The rainfall seemed to fall like 
piercing sharp arrows. By pouring water as thick as pillars, without 
cessation, the clouds gradually filled all the lands in Våndävana with 
water, and there was no visible distinction between higher and lower 
land. The situation was very dangerous, especially for the animals. The 
rainfall was accompanied by great winds, and every living creature in 
Våndävana began to tremble from the severe cold. Unable to find any 
other source of deliverance, they all approached Govinda to take shelter 
at His lotus feet. The cows especially, being much aggrieved from the 
heavy rain, bowed down their heads, and taking their calves underneath 
their bodies, they approached the Supreme Personality of Godhead to 
take shelter of His lotus feet. At that time all the inhabitants of 
Våndävana began to pray to Lord Kåñëa. “Dear Kåñëa,” they prayed, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
219
“You are all-powerful, and You are very affectionate to Your devotees. 
Now please protect us, who have been much harassed by angry Indra.” 
Upon hearing their prayer, Kåñëa could also understand that Indra, 
being bereft of his sacrificial honor, was pouring down rain that was 
accompanied by heavy pieces of ice and strong winds, although all this 
was out of season. Kåñëa understood that this was a deliberate exhibition 
of anger by Indra. He therefore concluded, “This demigod who thinks 
himself supreme has shown his great power, but I shall answer him 
according to My position, and I shall teach him that he is not 
autonomous in managing universal affairs. I am the Supreme Lord over 
all, and I shall thus take away his false prestige, which has risen from his 
power. The demigods are My devotees, and therefore it is not possible 
for them to forget My supremacy, but somehow or other he has become 
puffed up with material power and thus is now maddened. I shall act in 
such a way to relieve him of this false prestige. I shall give protection to 
My pure devotees in Våndävana, who are at present completely at My 
mercy and whom I have taken completely under My protection. I must 
save them by My mystic power.” 
Thinking in this way, Lord Kåñëa immediately picked up Govardhana 
Hill with one hand, exactly as a child picks up a mushroom from the 
ground. Thus He exhibited His transcendental pastime of lifting 
Govardhana Hill. Lord Kåñëa then addressed His devotees, “My dear 
brothers, My dear father, My dear inhabitants of Våndävana, you can 
now safely enter under the umbrella of Govardhana Hill, which I have 
just lifted. Do not be afraid of the hill and think that it will fall from My 
hand. You have been too much afflicted from the heavy rain and strong 
wind; therefore I have lifted this hill, which will protect you exactly like 
a huge umbrella. I think this is a proper arrangement to relieve you of 
your immediate distress. Be happy along with your animals underneath 
this great umbrella.” Being assured by Lord Kåñëa, all the inhabitants of 
Våndävana entered beneath the great hill along with their property and 
animals, and they all appeared to be safe. 
The inhabitants of Våndävana and their animals remained there for one 
week without being disturbed by hunger, thirst or any other discomforts. 
They were simply astonished to see how Kåñëa was holding up the 
mountain with the little finger of His left hand. Seeing the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
220
extraordinary mystic power of Kåñëa, Indra, the King of heaven, was 
thunderstruck and baffled in his determination. He immediately called 
for all the clouds and asked them to desist. When the sky became 
completely cleared of all clouds and there was sunrise again, the strong 
wind stopped. At that time Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
known now as the lifter of Govardhana Hill, said, “My dear cowherd 
men, now you can leave and take your wives, children, cows and 
valuables, because everything is ended. The inundation has gone down, 
along with the swelling waters of the river.” 
All the men loaded their valuables on carts and slowly left with their 
cows and other paraphernalia. After they had cleared out everything, 
Lord Kåñëa very slowly replaced Govardhana Hill exactly in the same 
position as it had been before. When everything was done, all the 
inhabitants of Våndävana approached Kåñëa with feelings of love and 
embraced Him with great ecstasy. The gopés, being naturally very 
affectionate to Kåñëa, began to offer Him yogurt mixed with their tears, 
and they poured incessant blessings upon Him. Mother Yaçodä, mother 
Rohiëé, Nanda and Balaräma, who is the strongest of the strong, 
embraced Kåñëa one after another and, from spontaneous feelings of 
affection, blessed Him over and over again. In the heavens, different 
demigods from different planetary systems, such as Siddhaloka, 
Gandharvaloka and Cäraëaloka, also began to show their complete 
satisfaction. They poured showers of flowers on the surface of the earth 
and sounded different conchshells. There was beating of drums, and 
being inspired by godly feelings, residents of Gandharvaloka began to 
play on their tambouras to please the Lord. After this incident, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, surrounded by His dear friends and 
the animals, returned to His home. As usual, the gopés began to chant 
the glorious pastimes of Lord Kåñëa with great feeling, for they were 
chanting from the heart. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-fifth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Devastating Rainfall in Våndävana.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
221
CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX 
Wonderful Kåñëa 
 
Without understanding the intricacies of Kåñëa, the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead, and without knowing His uncommon spiritual 
opulences, the innocent cowherd boys and men of Våndävana began to 
discuss the wonderful activities of Kåñëa, which surpass the activities of 
all men. 
One of them said, “My dear friends, considering His wonderful 
activities, how is it possible that such an uncommon boy would come 
and live with us in Våndävana? It is really not possible. Just imagine! He 
is now only seven years old! How is it possible for Him to lift 
Govardhana Hill in one hand and hold it up just as the king of elephants 
holds a lotus flower? To lift a lotus flower is a most insignificant thing 
for an elephant, and similarly Kåñëa lifted Govardhana Hill without 
exertion. When He was simply a small baby and could not even see 
properly, He killed a great demon, Pütanä. While sucking her breast, He 
also sucked out her life air. Kåñëa killed the Pütanä demon exactly as 
eternal time kills a living creature in due course. When He was only 
three months old, He was sleeping underneath a hand-driven cart. Being 
hungry for His mother’s breast, He began to cry and throw His legs 
upwards. And from the kicking of His small feet the cart immediately 
broke apart and fell to pieces. When He was only one year old, He was 
carried away by the Tåëävarta demon disguised as a whirlwind, and 
although He was taken very high in the sky, He simply hung on the neck 
of the demon and forced him to fall from the sky and immediately die. 
Once His mother, being disturbed by His stealing butter, tied Him to a 
wooden mortar, and the child pushed it towards a pair of trees known as 
yamala-arjuna and caused them to fall. Once, when He was engaged in 
tending the calves in the forest along with His elder brother, Balaräma, a 
demon named Bakäsura appeared, and Kåñëa at once bifurcated the 
demon’s beak. When the demon known as Vatsäsura entered among the 
calves tended by Kåñëa with a desire to kill Him, He immediately 
detected the demon, killed him and threw him into a tree. When Kåñëa, 
along with His brother, Balaräma, entered the Tälavana forest, the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
222
demon known as Dhenukäsura, in the shape of an ass, attacked Them 
and was immediately killed by Balaräma, who caught his hind legs and 
threw him into a palm tree. Although the Dhenukäsura demon was 
assisted by his cohorts, also in the shape of asses, all were killed, and the 
Tälavana forest was then open for the use of the animals and 
inhabitants of Våndävana. When Pralambäsura entered amongst Kåñëa’s 
cowherd boyfriends, Kåñëa caused him to be killed by Balaräma. 
Thereafter, Kåñëa saved His friends and cows from a severe forest fire, 
and He chastised the Käliya serpent in the lake of the Yamunä River 
and forced him to leave the vicinity of the Yamunä; He thereby made 
the water of the Yamunä poisonless.” 
Another one of the friends of Nanda Mahäräja said, “My dear Nanda, 
we do not know why we are so attracted by your son Kåñëa. We want to 
forget Him, but this is impossible. Why are we so naturally affectionate 
toward Him? Just imagine how wonderful it is! On one hand He is only a 
boy of seven years, and on the other hand there is a huge hill like 
Govardhana Hill, and He lifted it so easily! O Nanda Mahäräja, we are 
now in great doubt—your son Kåñëa must be one of the demigods. He is 
not at all an ordinary boy. Maybe He is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead.” 
On hearing the praises of the cowherd men in Våndävana, King Nanda 
said, “My dear friends, in reply to you I can simply present the statement 
of Garga Muni so that your doubts may be cleared. When he came to 
perform the name-giving ceremony, he said that this boy descends in 
different periods of time in different colors and that this time He has 
appeared in Våndävana in a blackish color, known as kåñëa. Previously 
He had a white color, then a red color, then a yellow color. He also said 
that this boy was once the son of Vasudeva, and everyone who knows of 
His previous birth calls Him Väsudeva. Actually he said that my son has 
many varieties of names, according to His different qualities and 
activities. Gargäcärya assured me that this boy would be all-auspicious 
for my family and that He would be able to give transcendental blissful 
pleasure to all the cowherd men and cows in Våndävana. Even though 
we would be put into various kinds of difficulties, by the grace of this 
boy we would be very easily freed from them. He also said that formerly 
this boy saved the world from an unregulated condition, and He saved 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
223
all honest men from the hands of the dishonest thieves. He also said that 
any fortunate man who becomes attached to this boy, Kåñëa, is never 
vanquished or defeated by his enemy. On the whole, He is exactly like 
Lord Viñëu, who always takes the side of the demigods, who are 
consequently never defeated by the demons. Gargäcärya thus concluded 
that my child would grow to be exactly like Viñëu in transcendental 
beauty, qualification, activities, influence and opulence, and so we 
should not be very astonished by His wonderful activities. After telling 
me this, Gargäcärya returned home, and since then we have been 
continually seeing the wonderful activities of this child. According to 
the version of Gargäcärya, I consider that He must be Näräyaëa Himself, 
or maybe a plenary portion of Näräyaëa.” 
When all the cowherd men had very attentively heard the statements of 
Gargäcärya through Nanda Mahäräja, they better appreciated the 
wonderful activities of Kåñëa and became very jubilant and satisfied. 
They began to praise Nanda Mahäräja, because by consulting him their 
doubts about Kåñëa were cleared. They said, “Let Kåñëa, who is so kind, 
beautiful and merciful, protect us. When angry Indra sent torrents of 
rain, accompanied by showers of ice blocks and high wind, He 
immediately took compassion upon us and saved us and our families, 
cows and valuable possessions by picking up Govardhana Hill, just as a 
child picks up a mushroom. He saved us so wonderfully. May He 
continue to glance mercifully over us and our cows. May we live 
peacefully under the protection of wonderful Kåñëa.” 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-sixth Chapter of 
Kåñëa, “Wonderful Kåñëa.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
224
CHAPTER TWENTY-SEVEN 
Prayers by Indra, the King of Heaven 
 
When Kåñëa saved the inhabitants of Våndävana from the wrath of 
Indra by lifting Govardhana Hill, a surabhi cow from Goloka 
Våndävana, as well as King Indra from the heavenly planets, appeared 
before Him. Indra, the King of heaven, was conscious of his offense 
before Kåñëa; therefore he stealthily appeared before Him in a secluded 
place. He immediately fell down at the lotus feet of Kåñëa, although his 
own crown was dazzling like sunshine. Indra knew about the exalted 
position of Kåñëa because Kåñëa is the master of Indra, but he could not 
believe that Kåñëa could come down and live in Våndävana among the 
cowherd men. When Kåñëa defied the authority of Indra, Indra became 
angry because he thought that he was all in all within this universe and 
that no one was as powerful as he. But after this incident, his false, 
puffed-up prestige was destroyed. Being conscious of his subordinate 
position, he appeared before Kåñëa with folded hands and began to offer 
the following prayers. 
“My dear Lord,” Indra said, “being puffed up by my false prestige, I 
thought that You had offended me by not allowing the cowherd men to 
perform the Indra-yajïa, and I thought that You wanted to enjoy the 
offerings that were arranged for the sacrifice. I thought that in the name 
of a Govardhana sacrifice You were taking my share of profit, and 
therefore I mistook Your position. Now by Your grace I can understand 
that You are the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, and that 
You are transcendental to all the material qualities. Your transcendental 
position is viçuddha-sattva, which is above the platform of the material 
mode of goodness, and Your transcendental abode is beyond the 
disturbance of the material qualities. Your name, fame, form, qualities, 
paraphernalia and pastimes are all beyond this material nature, and they 
are never disturbed by the three material modes. Your abode is accessible 
only for one who undergoes severe austerities and penances and becomes 
completely freed from the onslaught of material qualities like passion 
and ignorance. If someone thinks that when You come within this 
material world You accept the modes of material nature, he is mistaken. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
225
The waves of the material qualities are never able to touch You, and You 
certainly do not accept them when You are present within this world. 
Your Lordship is never conditioned by the laws of material nature. 
“My dear Lord, You are the original father of this cosmic manifestation. 
You are the supreme spiritual master of this cosmic world, and You are 
the original proprietor of everything. As eternal time, You are 
competent to chastise offenders. Within this material world there are 
many fools like myself who consider themselves to be the Supreme Lord 
or the all in all within the universe. You are so merciful that without 
accepting their offenses You devise means so that their false prestige is 
subdued and they can know that You, and no one else, are the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. 
“My dear Lord, You are the supreme father, the supreme spiritual master 
and the supreme king. Therefore, You have the right to chastise all 
living entities whenever there is any discrepancy in their behavior. The 
father, the spiritual master and the supreme executive officer of the 
state are always well-wishers of their sons, their students and their 
citizens respectively. As such, the well-wishers have the right to chastise 
their dependents. By Your own desire You appear auspiciously on the 
earth in Your eternal varieties of forms; You come to glorify the earthly 
planet and specifically to chastise persons who are falsely claiming to be 
God. In the material world there is regular competition between 
different types of living entities to become supreme leaders of society, 
and after being frustrated in achieving the supreme positions of 
leadership, foolish persons claim to be God, the Supreme Personality. 
There are many such foolish personalities in this world, like me, but in 
due course of time, when they come to their senses, they surrender unto 
You and again engage themselves properly by rendering service unto 
You. And that is the purpose of Your chastising persons envious of You. 
“My dear Lord, I committed a great offense unto Your lotus feet, being 
falsely proud of my material opulences, not knowing Your unlimited 
power. Therefore, my Lord, kindly excuse me, because I am fool number 
one. Kindly give me Your blessings so that I may not act so foolishly 
again. If You think, my Lord, that the offense is very great and cannot 
be excused, then I appeal to You that I am Your eternal servant; You 
appear in this world to give protection to Your eternal servants and to 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
226
destroy the demons who maintain great military strength just to burden 
the very existence of the earth. As I am Your eternal servant, kindly 
excuse me. 
“My dear Lord, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I offer my 
respectful obeisances unto You because You are the Supreme Person and 
the Supreme Soul. You are the son of Vasudeva, and You are the 
Supreme Lord, Kåñëa, the master of all pure devotees. Please accept my 
prostrated obeisances. You are the personification of supreme 
knowledge. You can appear anywhere, according to Your desire, in any 
one of Your eternal forms. You are the root of all creation and the 
Supreme Soul of all living entities. Due to my gross ignorance, I created 
a great disturbance in Våndävana by sending torrents of rain and a 
heavy hailstorm. I acted out of severe anger caused by Your stopping the 
sacrifice which was to be held to satisfy me. But my dear Lord, You are so 
kind to me that You have bestowed Your mercy upon me by destroying 
all my false pride. I therefore take shelter of Your lotus feet. My dear 
Lord, You are not only the supreme controller but also the spiritual 
master of all living entities.” 
Thus praised by Indra, Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, smiled beautifully and then replied in a grave voice like a 
rumbling cloud: “My dear Indra, I stopped your sacrifice just to show you 
My causeless mercy and to remind you that I am your eternal master. I 
am the master not only of you but of all the other demigods as well. You 
should always remember that all your material opulences are due to My 
mercy. No living entity can independently become opulent; one must be 
favored by My mercy. Everyone should always remember that I am the 
Supreme Lord. I can show anyone My favor, and I can chastise anyone, 
because no one is superior to Me. If I find someone overpowered by false 
pride, in order to show him My causeless mercy I withdraw all his 
opulences.” 
It is noteworthy that Kåñëa sometimes removes all of a rich man’s 
opulences in order to facilitate his becoming a soul surrendered to Him. 
This is a special favor of the Lord’s. Sometimes it is seen that a person is 
very opulent materially, but due to his devotional service to the Lord he 
may be reduced to poverty. One should not think, however, that because 
he worshiped the Supreme Lord he became poverty-stricken. The real 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
227
purport is that when a person is a pure devotee but at the same time, by 
miscalculation, wants to lord it over material nature, the Lord shows His 
special mercy by taking away all material opulences until at last he 
surrenders unto the Supreme Lord. 
After instructing Indra, Lord Kåñëa asked him to return to his kingdom 
in the heavenly planets and to remember always that he is never the 
supreme but is always subordinate to the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. He also advised him to remain as King of heaven but to be 
careful of false pride. 
After this, the transcendental surabhi cow who had come with Indra to 
see Kåñëa offered her respectful obeisances unto Him and worshiped 
Him. The surabhi offered her prayer as follows: “My dear Lord Kåñëa, 
You are the most powerful of all mystic yogés because You are the soul of 
the complete universe, and only from You has all this cosmic 
manifestation taken place. Therefore, although Indra tried his best to 
kill my descendant cows in Våndävana, they remained under Your 
shelter, and You have protected them all so well. We do not know 
anyone else as the Supreme, nor do we go to any other god or demigods 
for protection. Therefore, You are our Indra, You are the supreme father 
of the whole cosmic manifestation, and You are the protector and 
elevator of all the cows, brähmaëas, demigods and others who are pure 
devotees of Your Lordship. O Supersoul of the universe, let us bathe You 
with our milk, for You are our Indra. O Lord, You appear just to 
diminish the burden of impure activities on the earth.” 
Then the surabhi cow bathed Kåñëa with her milk, and Indra bathed 
Him with the water of the celestial Ganges through the trunk of his 
carrier elephant. After this, the surabhi cows and all the demigods and 
their mothers joined the heavenly king Indra in worshiping Lord Kåñëa 
by bathing Him with Ganges water and the milk of the surabhis. Thus 
Govinda, Lord Kåñëa, was pleased with all of them. The residents of all 
higher planetary systems, such as Gandharvaloka, Vidyädharaloka, 
Siddhaloka and Cäraëaloka, all combined and glorified the Lord by 
chanting His holy name as their wives and damsels danced with great 
joy. They very much satisfied the Lord by incessantly pouring flowers 
from the sky. When everything was very nicely and joyfully settled, the 
cows overflooded the surface of the earth with their milk. The water of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
228
the rivers began to flow with various tasty liquids and give nourishment 
to the trees, producing fruits and flowers of different colors and tastes. 
The trees began to pour drops of honey. The hills and mountains began 
to produce potent medicinal plants and valuable stones. Because of 
Kåñëa’s presence, all these things happened very nicely, and the lower 
animals, who were generally envious of one another, were envious no 
longer. 
After satisfying Kåñëa, who is the Lord of all the cows in Våndävana and 
who is known as Govinda, King Indra took His permission to return to 
his heavenly kingdom. As he passed through cosmic space, he was 
surrounded by all kinds of demigods. This great incident is a powerful 
example of how Kåñëa consciousness can benefit the world. Even the 
lower animals forget their envious nature and become elevated to the 
qualities of the demigods. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-seventh Chapter of 
Kåñëa, “Prayers by Indra, the King of Heaven.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
229
CHAPTER TWENTY-EIGHT 
Releasing Nanda Mahäräja from  
the Clutches of Varuëa 
 
The Govardhana-püjä ceremony took place on the new-moon day. After 
this, there were torrents of rain and hailstorms imposed by King Indra 
for seven days. Nine days of the waxing moon having passed, on the 
tenth day King Indra worshiped Lord Kåñëa, and thus the matter was 
satisfactorily settled. After this, on the eleventh day of the full moon, 
Ekädaçé, Mahäräja Nanda observed fasting for the whole day, and just 
early in the morning of the next day, Dvädaçé, he went to take a bath in 
the river Yamunä. He entered deep into the water of the river, but he 
was arrested immediately by one of the servants of Varuëadeva. This 
servant brought Nanda Mahäräja before the demigod Varuëa and 
accused him of taking a bath in the river at the wrong time. According 
to astronomical calculations, the time in which he took bath was 
considered demoniac. The fact was that Nanda Mahäräja wanted to take 
a bath in the river Yamunä early in the morning before the sunrise, but 
somehow or other he was a little too early, and he bathed at an 
inauspicious time. Consequently he was arrested. 
When Nanda Mahäräja was taken away by one of Varuëa’s servants, 
Nanda’s companions began to call loudly for Kåñëa and Balaräma. 
Immediately Kåñëa and Balaräma could understand that Nanda 
Mahäräja had been taken by a servant of Varuëa. Thus They went to 
the abode of Varuëa, for They were pledged to give protection to the 
inhabitants of Våndävana, who were all unalloyed devotees of the Lord. 
Devotees, having no shelter other than the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, naturally cry to Him for help, exactly like children who do not 
know anything but the protection of their parents. The demigod Varuëa 
received Lord Kåñëa and Balaräma with great respect and said, “My dear 
Lord, actually at this very moment, because of Your presence, my life as 
the demigod Varuëa has become successful. Although I am the 
proprietor of all the treasures in the water, I know that such possessions 
do not make for a successful life. But at this moment, as I look at You, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
230
my life is made completely successful because by seeing You I no longer 
have to accept a material body. Therefore, O Lord, Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, Supreme Brahman and Supersoul of everything, let me 
offer my respectful obeisances unto You. You are the supreme 
transcendental personality; there is no possibility of imposing the 
influence of material nature upon You. I am very sorry that my man, 
being foolish, by not knowing what to do or what not to do, has 
mistakenly arrested Your father, Nanda Mahäräja. So I beg Your pardon 
for the offense of my servant. I think that it was Your plan to show me 
Your mercy by Your personal presence here. My dear Lord Kåñëa, 
Govinda, be merciful upon me—here is Your father. You can take him 
back immediately.” 
In this way Lord Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, rescued 
His father and presented him before his friends, bringing them great 
jubilation. Nanda Mahäräja was surprised that although the demigod 
was so opulent, he offered such respect to Kåñëa. That was very 
astonishing to Nanda, and he began to describe the incident to his 
friends and relatives with great wonder. 
Actually, although Kåñëa was acting so wonderfully, Mahäräja Nanda 
and mother Yaçodä could not think of Him as the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead. Instead, they always accepted Him as their beloved child. 
Thus Nanda Mahäräja did not accept the fact that Varuëa worshiped 
Kåñëa because Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rather he 
took it that because Kåñëa was such a wonderful child He was respected 
even by Varuëa. The friends of Nanda Mahäräja, all the cowherd men, 
became eager to know if Kåñëa was actually the Supreme Personality and 
if He was going to give them all salvation. When they were all thus 
consulting among themselves, Kåñëa understood their minds, and in 
order to assure them of their destiny in the spiritual kingdom, He 
showed them the spiritual sky. Generally, ordinary persons are engaged 
simply in working hard in the material world, and they have no 
information that there is another kingdom or another sky, which is 
known as the spiritual sky, where life is eternal, blissful and full of 
knowledge. As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, a person returning to 
that spiritual sky never returns to this material world of death and 
suffering. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
231
Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is always anxious to give 
information to the conditioned soul that there is a spiritual sky far, far 
beyond this material sky, transcendental to the innumerable universes 
created within the total material energy. Kåñëa is, of course, always very 
kind to every conditioned soul, but, as stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, He is 
especially inclined to the pure devotees. Hearing their inquiries, Kåñëa 
immediately thought that His devotees in Våndävana should be 
informed of the spiritual sky and the Vaikuëöha planets therein. 
Within the material world, every conditioned soul is in the darkness of 
ignorance. This means that all conditioned souls are under the concept 
of this bodily existence. Everyone is under the impression that he is of 
this material world, and with this concept of life, everyone is working in 
ignorance in different forms of life. The activities of the particular type 
of body are called karma, or fruitive action. All conditioned souls, being 
under the impression of the bodily concept, are working according to 
their particular types of body. These activities are creating their future 
conditioned life. Because they have very little information of the 
spiritual world, they do not generally take to spiritual activities, which 
are called bhakti-yoga. Those who successfully practice bhakti-yoga go 
directly to the spiritual world after giving up this present body, and 
there they become situated in one of the Vaikuëöha planets. The 
inhabitants of Våndävana are all pure devotees. Their destination after 
quitting the body is Kåñëaloka. They even surpass the Vaikuëöhalokas. 
The fact is that those who are always engaged in Kåñëa consciousness 
and mature, pure devotional service are given the chance, after death, to 
gain Kåñëa’s association in one of the universes within the material 
world. Kåñëa’s pastimes are continuously going on, either in this 
universe or in another universe. Just as the sun globe is passing over 
many places across this earthly planet, so kåñëa-lélä, or the 
transcendental advent and pastimes of Kåñëa, are also going on 
continuously, either in this or another universe. The mature devotees, 
who have completely executed Kåñëa consciousness, are immediately 
transferred to the universe where Kåñëa is appearing. In that universe 
the devotees get their first opportunity to associate with Kåñëa 
personally and directly. The training goes on, as we see in the 
våndävana-lélä of Kåñëa within this planet. Kåñëa therefore revealed the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
232
actual features of the Vaikuëöha planets so that the inhabitants of 
Våndävana could know their destination. 
Thus Kåñëa showed them the eternal, ever-existing spiritual sky, which 
is unlimited and full of knowledge. Within this material world there are 
different grades of forms, and according to the grade, knowledge is 
proportionately manifested. For example, the knowledge in the body of a 
child is not as perfect as the knowledge in the body of an adult man. 
Everywhere there are different grades of living entities—in aquatic 
animals, in the plants and trees, in the reptiles and insects, in birds and 
beasts and in the civilized and uncivilized human forms of life. Above 
the human form of life there are demigods, Cäraëas and Siddhas on up 
to Brahmaloka, where Lord Brahmä lives, and among these demigods 
there are always different grades of knowledge. But past this material 
world, in the spiritual sky, everyone is in full knowledge, and therefore 
all the living entities there are engaged in devotional service to the 
Lord, either in the Vaikuëöha planets or in Kåñëaloka. 
As it is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä, full knowledge means knowing 
Kåñëa to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Vedas and the 
Bhagavad-gétä it is also stated that in the brahmajyoti, or spiritual sky, 
there is no need of sunlight, moonlight or electricity. All those planets 
are self-illuminating, and all of them are eternally situated. There is no 
question of creation and annihilation in the brahmajyoti, or spiritual sky. 
The Bhagavad-gétä also confirms that beyond the material sky there is 
another, eternal, spiritual sky, where everything is eternally existing. 
Information of the spiritual sky can be had only by great sages and 
saintly persons who have already surpassed the influence of the three 
material modes of nature by engaging in devotional service, or Kåñëa 
consciousness. Unless one is constantly situated on that transcendental 
platform, it is not possible to understand the spiritual nature. 
Therefore it is recommended that one should take to bhakti-yoga and 
keep himself engaged twenty-four hours a day in Kåñëa consciousness, 
which places one beyond the reach of the modes of material nature. One 
in Kåñëa consciousness can easily understand the nature of the spiritual 
sky and Vaikuëöhaloka. The inhabitants of Våndävana, being always 
engaged in Kåñëa consciousness, could therefore very easily understand 
the transcendental nature of the Vaikuëöhalokas. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
233
Thus Kåñëa led all the cowherd men, headed by Nanda Mahäräja, to the 
lake where Akrüra was later shown the Vaikuëöha planetary system. 
They took their bath immediately and saw the real nature of the 
Vaikuëöhalokas. After seeing the spiritual sky and the Vaikuëöhalokas, 
all the men, headed by Nanda Mahäräja, felt wonderfully blissful, and 
upon coming out of the lake, they saw Kåñëa, who was being worshiped 
with excellent prayers. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-eighth Chapter of 
Kåñëa, “Releasing Nanda Mahäräja from the Clutches of Varuëa.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
234
CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE 
The Räsa Dance: Introduction 
 
In Çrémad-Bhägavatam it is stated that the räsa dance took place on the 
full-moon night of the çarat season. From the statements of previous 
chapters, it appears that the festival of Govardhana-püjä was performed 
just after the dark-moon night of the month of Kärttika, and thereafter 
the ceremony of Bhrätå-dvitéyä was performed; then the wrath of Indra 
was exhibited in the shape of torrents of rain and hailstones, and Lord 
Kåñëa held up Govardhana Hill for seven days, until the ninth day of 
the moon. Thereafter, on the tenth day, the inhabitants of Våndävana 
were talking amongst themselves about the wonderful activities of 
Kåñëa, and the next day, Ekädaçé was observed by Nanda Mahäräja. On 
the next day, Dvädaçé, Nanda Mahäräja went to take a bath in the 
Ganges and was arrested by the men of Varuëa; then he was released by 
Lord Kåñëa. Then Nanda Mahäräja, along with the cowherd men, was 
shown the spiritual sky. 
In this way, the full-moon night of the çarat season came to an end. The 
full-moon night of Äçvina is called çarat-pürëimä. It appears from the 
statements of Çrémad-Bhägavatam that Kåñëa had to wait another year 
for such a moon before enjoying the räsa dance with the gopés. At the 
age of seven years He lifted Govardhana Hill. Therefore the räsa dance 
took place during His eighth year. 
From the Vedic literature it appears that when a theatrical actor dances 
among many dancing girls, the group dance is called a räsa dance. When 
Kåñëa saw the full-moon night of the çarat season, decorated with 
various seasonal flowers—especially the mallikä flowers, which are very 
fragrant—He remembered the gopés’ prayers to goddess Kätyäyané, 
wherein they prayed for Kåñëa to be their husband. He thought that the 
full-moon night of the çarat season was just suitable for a nice dance. So 
their desire to have Kåñëa as their husband would then be fulfilled. 
The words used in this connection in Çrémad-Bhägavatam are bhagavän 
api. This means that although Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead and thus has no desire that needs to be fulfilled (because He is 
always full with six opulences), He still wanted to enjoy the company of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
235
the gopés in the räsa dance. Bhagavän api signifies that this is not like 
the ordinary dancing of young boys and young girls. The specific words 
used in Çrémad-Bhägavatam are yogamäyäm upäçritaù, which mean that 
this dancing with the gopés is on the platform of yogamäyä, not 
mahämäyä. The dancing of young boys and girls within the material 
world is in the kingdom of mahämäyä, or the external energy. The räsa 
dance of Kåñëa with the gopés is on the platform of yogamäyä. The 
difference between the platforms of yogamäyä and mahämäyä is 
compared in the Caitanya-caritämåta to the difference between gold and 
iron. From the viewpoint of metallurgy, gold and iron are both metals, 
but the quality is completely different. Similarly, although the räsa 
dance and Lord Kåñëa’s association with the gopés appear like the 
ordinary mixing of young boys and girls, the quality is completely 
different. The difference is appreciated by great Vaiñëavas because they 
can understand the difference between love of Kåñëa and lust. 
On the mahämäyä platform, dances take place on the basis of sense 
gratification. But when Kåñëa called the gopés by sounding His flute, the 
gopés very hurriedly rushed towards the spot of the räsa dance with the 
transcendental desire to satisfy Kåñëa. The author of Caitanya-
caritämåta, Kåñëadäsa Kaviräja Gosvämé, has explained that lust means 
sense gratification, and love also means sense gratification—but for 
Kåñëa. In other words, when activities are enacted on the platform of 
personal sense gratification, they are called material activities, but when 
they are enacted for the satisfaction of Kåñëa, then they are spiritual 
activities. On any platform of activities, the principle of sense 
gratification is there. But on the spiritual platform, sense gratification is 
for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, whereas on the material 
platform it is for the performer. For example, on the material platform, 
when a servant serves a master, he is not trying to satisfy the senses of 
the master but rather his own senses. The servant would not serve the 
master if the payment stopped. That means that the servant engages 
himself in the service of the master just to satisfy his senses. On the 
spiritual platform, however, the servitor of the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead serves Kåñëa without payment, and he continues his service in 
all conditions. That is the difference between Kåñëa consciousness and 
material consciousness. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
236
It appears that Kåñëa enjoyed the räsa dance with the gopés when He was 
eight years old. At that time, many of the gopés were married, because in 
India, especially in those days, girls were married at a very early age. 
There are even many instances of a girl’s giving birth to a child at the 
age of twelve. Under the circumstances, all the gopés who wanted to 
have Kåñëa as their husband were already married. At the same time, 
they continued to hope that Kåñëa would be their husband. Their 
attitude toward Kåñëa was that of paramour love. Therefore, the loving 
affairs of Kåñëa with the gopés are called parakéya-rasa. The attitude of a 
married man who desires another wife or a wife who desires another 
husband is called parakéya-rasa. 
Actually, Kåñëa is the husband of everyone because He is the supreme 
enjoyer. The gopés wanted Kåñëa to be their husband, but factually there 
was no possibility of His marrying all the gopés. But because they had 
that natural tendency to accept Kåñëa as their supreme husband, the 
relationship between the gopés and Kåñëa is called parakéya-rasa. This 
parakéya-rasa is ever-existent in Goloka Våndävana in the spiritual sky, 
where there is no possibility of the inebriety which characterizes 
parakéya-rasa in the material world. In the material world, parakéya-rasa 
is abominable, whereas in the spiritual world it is present in the 
superexcellent relationship of Kåñëa and the gopés. There are many 
other relationships with Kåñëa: master and servant, friend and friend, 
parent and son, and lover and beloved. Out of all these rasas, the 
parakéya-rasa is considered to be the topmost. 
This material world is the perverted reflection of the spiritual world; it is 
just like the reflection of a tree on the bank of a reservoir of water: the 
topmost part of the tree is seen as the lowest part. Similarly, parakéya-
rasa, when pervertedly reflected in this material world, is most 
abominable. When people, therefore, imitate the räsa dance of Kåñëa 
with the gopés, they simply enjoy the perverted, abominable reflection of 
the transcendental parakéya-rasa. There is no possibility of enjoying this 
transcendental parakéya-rasa within the material world. It is stated in 
Çrémad-Bhägavatam that one should not imitate this parakéya-rasa even 
in dream or imagination. Those who do so drink the most deadly poison. 
When Kåñëa, the supreme enjoyer, desired to enjoy the company of the 
gopés on that full-moon night of the çarat season, exactly at that very 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
237
moment, the moon, the lord of the stars, appeared in the sky, displaying 
its most beautiful features. The full-moon night of the çarat season is the 
most beautiful night in the year. In the Indian city of Agra, in the Uttar 
Pradesh province, there is a great monument called the Taj Mahal, 
which is a tomb made of first-class marble stone. During the night of the 
full moon of the çarat season, many foreigners go to see the beautiful 
reflections of the moon on the tomb. Thus this full-moon night is 
celebrated even today for its beauty. 
When the full moon rose in the east, it tinged everything with a reddish 
color. With the rising of the moon, the whole sky appeared smeared by 
red kuìkuma. When a husband long separated from his wife returns 
home, he decorates the face of his wife with red kuìkuma. This long-
expected moonrise of the çarat season was thus smearing the eastern sky. 
The appearance of the moon increased Kåñëa’s desire to dance with the 
gopés. The forests were filled with fragrant flowers. The atmosphere was 
cooling and festive. When Lord Kåñëa began to blow His flute, the gopés 
all over Våndävana became enchanted. Their attraction to the vibration 
of the flute increased a thousand times due to the rising full moon, the 
red horizon, the calm and cool atmosphere and the blossoming flowers. 
All these gopés were by nature very much attracted to Kåñëa’s beauty, 
and when they heard the vibration of His flute, they became apparently 
lustful to satisfy the senses of Kåñëa. 
Immediately upon hearing the vibration of the flute, they all left their 
respective engagements and proceeded to the spot where Kåñëa was 
standing. While they ran very swiftly, all their earrings swung back and 
forth. They all rushed toward the place known as Vaàçévaöa. Some of 
them were engaged in milking cows, but they left their milking business 
half finished and immediately went to Kåñëa. One of them had just 
collected milk and put it in a milk pan on the stove to boil, but she did 
not care whether the milk overboiled and spilled—she immediately left 
to go see Kåñëa. Some of them were breast-feeding their small babies, 
and some were engaged in distributing food to the members of their 
families, but they left all such engagements and immediately rushed 
towards the spot where Kåñëa was playing His flute. Some were engaged 
in serving their husbands, and some were themselves engaged in eating, 
but caring neither to serve their husbands nor eat, they immediately left. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
238
Some of them wanted to decorate their faces with cosmetic ointments 
and to dress themselves very nicely before going to Kåñëa, but 
unfortunately they could not finish their cosmetic decorations or put on 
their clothes in the right way because of their anxiety to meet Kåñëa 
immediately. Their faces were decorated hurriedly and were haphazardly 
finished; some even put the lower part of their clothes on the upper part 
of their bodies and the upper part on the lower part. 
While all the gopés were hurriedly leaving their respective places, their 
husbands, brothers and fathers were all struck with wonder to know 
where they were going. Being young girls, they were protected either by 
husbands, elder brothers or fathers. All their guardians forbade them to 
go to Kåñëa, but they disregarded them. When a person becomes 
attracted by Kåñëa and is in full Kåñëa consciousness, he does not care 
for any worldly duties, even though very urgent. Kåñëa consciousness is 
so powerful that it gives everyone relief from all material activities. Çréla 
Rüpa Gosvämé has written a very nice verse wherein one gopé advises 
another, “My dear friend, if you desire to enjoy the company of material 
society, friendship and love, then please do not go to see this smiling boy 
Govinda, who is standing on the bank of the Yamunä and playing His 
flute, His lips brightened by the beams of the full moonlight.” Çréla Rüpa 
Gosvämé indirectly instructs that one who has been captivated by the 
beautiful smiling face of Kåñëa has lost all attraction for material 
enjoyments. This is the test of advancement in Kåñëa consciousness: a 
person advancing in Kåñëa consciousness must lose interest in material 
activities and personal sense gratification. 
Some of the gopés were factually detained from going to Kåñëa by their 
husbands and were locked up by force within their rooms. Being unable 
to go to Kåñëa, they began to meditate upon His transcendental form by 
closing their eyes. They already had the form of Kåñëa within their 
minds. They proved to be the greatest yogés; as is stated in the Bhagavad-
gétä, a person who is constantly thinking of Kåñëa within his heart with 
faith and love is considered to be the topmost of all yogés. Actually, a yogé 
concentrates his mind on the form of Lord Viñëu. That is real yoga. 
Kåñëa is the original form of all viñëu-tattvas. The gopés could not go to 
Kåñëa personally, so they began to meditate on Him as perfect yogés. 
In the conditioned stage of the living entities, there are two kinds of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
239
results of fruitive activities: the conditioned living entity who is 
constantly engaged in sinful activities has suffering as his result, and he 
who is engaged in pious activities has material enjoyment as a result. In 
either case—material suffering or material enjoyment—the enjoyer or 
sufferer is conditioned by material nature. 
The gopé associates of Kåñëa who assembled in the place where Kåñëa 
was appearing were from different groups. Most of the gopés were eternal 
companions of Kåñëa. As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä, änanda-cin-
maya-rasa-pratibhävitäbhiù: in the spiritual world the associates of 
Kåñëa, especially the gopés, are manifestations of the pleasure potency of 
Lord Kåñëa. They are expansions of Çrématé Rädhäräëé. But when Kåñëa 
exhibits His transcendental pastimes within the material world in some 
of the universes, not only the eternal associates of Kåñëa come but also 
those who are being promoted to that status from this material world. 
The gopés who joined Kåñëa’s pastimes within this material world were 
coming from the status of ordinary human beings. If they had been 
bound by fruitive action, they were fully freed from the reaction of 
karma by constant meditation on Kåñëa. Their severely painful 
yearnings caused by their not being able to see Kåñëa freed them from all 
sinful reactions, and their ecstasy of transcendental love for Kåñëa in 
His absence ended all their reactions to material pious activities. The 
conditioned soul is subjected to birth and death, either by pious or sinful 
activities, but the gopés who began to meditate on Kåñëa transcended 
both positions and became purified and thus elevated to the status of the 
gopés already expanded by His pleasure potency. All the gopés who 
concentrated their minds on Kåñëa in the spirit of paramour love 
became fully purified of all the fruitive reactions of material nature, and 
some of them immediately gave up their material bodies developed 
under the three modes of material nature. 
Mahäräja Parékñit heard Çukadeva Gosvämé explain the situation of the 
gopés who assembled with Kåñëa in the räsa dance. When he heard that 
some of the gopés, simply by concentrating on Kåñëa as their paramour, 
became freed from all contamination of material birth and death, he 
said, “The gopés did not know that Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead. They accepted Him as a beautiful boy and considered Him to 
be their paramour. So how was it possible for them to get freed from the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
240
material condition just by thinking of a paramour?” One should consider 
here that Kåñëa and ordinary living beings are qualitatively one. The 
ordinary living beings, being part and parcel of Kåñëa, are also Brahman, 
but Kåñëa is the Supreme—Parabrahman. The question is, If it is 
possible for a devotee to get free from the material, contaminated stage 
simply by thinking of Kåñëa, then why not others who are also thinking 
of someone? If one is thinking of a husband or son, or if anyone at all is 
thinking of another living entity, then, since all living entities are also 
Brahman, why are all those who thus think of others not freed from the 
contaminated stage of material nature? This is a very intelligent 
question, because there are always atheists imitating Kåñëa. In these days 
of Kali-yuga, there are many rascals who think themselves to be as good 
as Kåñëa and who cheat people into believing that thinking of them is as 
good as thinking of Lord Kåñëa. Parékñit Mahäräja, apprehending the 
future dangerous condition of blind followers of demoniac imitators, 
therefore asked this question, and fortunately it is recorded in Çrémad-
Bhägavatam to warn innocent people that thinking of an ordinary man 
and thinking of Kåñëa are not the same. 
Actually, even thinking of the demigods cannot compare to thinking of 
Kåñëa. It is also warned in the vaiñëava-tantra that one who puts Viñëu, 
Näräyaëa or Kåñëa on the same level as the demigods is called a päñaëòé, 
or rascal. On hearing this question from Mahäräja Parékñit, Çukadeva 
Gosvämé replied, “My dear King, your question is already answered, even 
before this incident.” Because Parékñit Mahäräja wanted to clear up the 
situation, his spiritual master answered him very intelligently, “Why are 
you again asking about the same subject matter which has already been 
explained to you? Why are you so forgetful?” A spiritual master is always 
in the superior position, so he has the right to chastise his disciple in this 
way. Çukadeva Gosvämé knew that Mahäräja Parékñit asked the question 
not for his own understanding but as a warning to the future innocent 
people who might think others to be equal to Kåñëa. 
Çukadeva Gosvämé then reminded Parékñit Mahäräja about the salvation 
of Çiçupäla. Çiçupäla was always envious of Kåñëa, and because of his 
envy Kåñëa killed him. But since Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, Çiçupäla gained salvation simply by seeing Him. If an envious 
person can get salvation simply by concentrating his mind on Kåñëa, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
241
then what to speak of the gopés, who are so dear to Kåñëa and always 
think of Him in love? There must be some difference between the 
enemies and the friends. If Kåñëa’s enemies could get freed from 
material contamination and become one with the Supreme, then 
certainly His dear friends like the gopés can achieve such freedom and 
much more. 
Besides that, in the Bhagavad-gétä Kåñëa is called Håñékeça. Çukadeva 
Gosvämé also said that Kåñëa is Håñékeça, the Supersoul. Whereas an 
ordinary man is a conditioned soul covered by the material body, Kåñëa 
and Kåñëa’s body are the same because He is Håñékeça. Any person 
making a distinction between Kåñëa and Kåñëa’s body is fool number 
one. Kåñëa is Håñékeça and Adhokñaja. These two particular words have 
been used by Çukadeva Gosvämé in this instance. Håñékeça is the 
Supersoul, and Adhokñaja is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
transcendental to the material nature. Just to show favor to the ordinary 
living entities, out of His causeless mercy He appears as He is. 
Unfortunately, foolish persons mistake Him to be an ordinary person, 
and so they become eligible to go to hell. 
Çukadeva Gosvämé continued to inform Mahäräja Parékñit that Kåñëa is 
not an ordinary person but rather the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead—imperishable, immeasurable, without any material qualities 
but full of all spiritual qualities. He appears in this material world out of 
His causeless mercy, and whenever He appears, He appears as He is, 
without change. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä, where the Lord 
says that He appears by His spiritual potency. He does not appear under 
the control of this material potency. The material potency is under His 
control. In the Bhagavad-gétä it is stated that the material potency is 
working under His superintendence. It is also confirmed in the Brahma-
saàhitä that the material potency, known as Durgä, is acting just as a 
shadow which moves with the movement of the substance. The 
conclusion is that if one somehow or other becomes attached to Kåñëa or 
attracted to Him, either because of His qualities of beauty, opulence, 
fame, strength, renunciation or knowledge, through affection or 
friendship, or even through lust, anger or fear, then one’s salvation and 
freedom from material contamination are assured. 
In the Bhagavad-gétä, Eighteenth Chapter, the Lord states that one who 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
242
is engaged in preaching Kåñëa consciousness is very dear to Him. A 
preacher has to face many difficulties in his struggle to preach pure 
Kåñëa consciousness. Sometimes he has to suffer bodily injuries, and 
sometimes he has to meet death also. All this is taken as a great austerity 
on behalf of Kåñëa. Kåñëa therefore has said that such a preacher is very, 
very dear to Him. If Kåñëa’s enemies can expect salvation simply by 
concentrating their minds on Him, then what to speak of persons who 
are so dear to Kåñëa? The conclusion should be that the salvation of 
those who are engaged in preaching Kåñëa consciousness in the world is 
guaranteed in all circumstances. But such preachers never care for 
salvation, because factually one who is engaged in Kåñëa consciousness, 
devotional service, has already achieved salvation. Çukadeva Gosvämé 
therefore assured King Parékñit that he should always rest assured that 
one attracted by Kåñëa attains liberation from material bondage because 
Kåñëa is the transcendental master of all mystic power. 
When all the gopés assembled, as described, before Kåñëa, He began to 
speak to them, welcoming them as well as discouraging them by word 
jugglery. Kåñëa is the supreme speaker; He is the speaker of the 
Bhagavad-gétä. He can speak on the highest elevated subjects of 
philosophy, politics, economics—everything. And He also spoke before 
the gopés, who were so dear to Him. He wanted to enchant them by word 
jugglery, and thus He began to speak as follows. 
“O ladies of Våndävana,” Kåñëa said, “you are very fortunate, and you 
are very dear to Me. I am very pleased that you have come here, and I 
hope everything is well in Våndävana. Now please order Me. What can I 
do for you? What is the purpose of your coming here in the dead of 
night? Kindly take your seats and let Me know what I can do for you.” 
The gopés had come to Kåñëa to enjoy His company, to dance with Him, 
embrace Him and kiss Him, and when Kåñëa began to receive them very 
officially, showing all kinds of etiquette, they were surprised. He was 
treating them as ordinary society women. Therefore they began to smile 
among themselves, and though they very eagerly listened to Kåñëa talk 
in that way, they were surprised. Then Kåñëa began to instruct them: 
“My dear friends, you must know that it is now the dead of night, and 
the forest is very dangerous. At this time all the ferocious jungle 
animals—the tigers, bears, jackals and wolves—are prowling in the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
243
forest. Therefore it is very dangerous for you. You cannot select a secure 
place now. Everywhere you go you will find that all these animals are 
loitering to find their prey. I think, therefore, that you are taking a great 
risk in coming here in the dead of night. Please turn back immediately, 
without delay.” 
When He saw that they continued to smile, He said, “I very much 
appreciate your bodily features. All of you have nice, very thin waists.” 
All of the gopés there were exquisitely beautiful. They are described by 
the word sumadhyamä; the standard of beauty of a woman is said to be 
sumadhyamä when the middle portion of the body is slender. 
Kåñëa wanted to impress on them that they were not old enough to take 
care of themselves. Actually, they required protection. It was not very 
wise for them to come in the dead of night to Kåñëa. Kåñëa also 
indicated that He was young and that they were young girls. “It does not 
look very well for young girls and boys to remain together in the dead of 
night.” After hearing this advice, the gopés did not seem very happy; 
therefore Kåñëa began to stress the point in a different way. 
“My dear friends, I can understand that you have left your homes 
without the permission of your guardians; therefore I think your 
mothers, your fathers, your elder brothers and even your sons, and what 
to speak of your husbands, must be very anxious to find you. As long as 
you are here, they must be searching in different places, and their minds 
must be very agitated. So don’t tarry. Please go back and make them 
peaceful.” 
When the gopés appeared to be a little bit disturbed and angry from 
hearing the free advice of Kåñëa, they diverted their attention to 
looking at the beauty of the forest. At that time the whole forest was 
illuminated by the bright shining of the moon, and the air was blowing 
very silently over the blooming flowers, and the green leaves of the trees 
were moving in the breeze. Kåñëa took the opportunity of their looking 
at the forest to advise them. “I think you have come out to see the 
beautiful Våndävana forest on this night,” He said, “but you must now be 
satisfied. So return to your homes without delay. I understand that you 
are all very chaste women, so now that you have seen the beautiful 
atmosphere of the Våndävana forests, please return home and engage in 
the faithful service of your respective husbands. Some of you must have 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
244
babies by this time, although you are very young. You must have left 
your small babies at home, and they must be crying. Please immediately 
go back home and just feed them with your breast milk. I can also 
understand that you have very great affection for Me, and out of that 
transcendental affection you have come here, hearing My playing on the 
flute. Your feelings of love and affection for Me are very appropriate 
because I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead. All living creatures 
are My parts and parcels, and naturally they are affectionate to Me. So 
this affection for Me is very welcome, and I congratulate you for this. 
Now you can go back to your homes. Another thing I must explain to 
you is that for a chaste woman, service to the husband without duplicity 
is the best religious principle. A woman should be not only faithful and 
chaste to the husband but affectionate to the friends of her husband, 
obedient to the father and mother of the husband, and affectionate to 
the younger brothers of the husband. And most importantly, the woman 
must take care of the children.” 
In this way, Kåñëa explained the duty of a woman. He also stressed the 
point of serving the husband: “Even if he is not of very good character, 
or even if he is not very rich or fortunate, or even if he is old or invalid 
on account of continued diseases, whatever her husband’s condition, a 
woman should not divorce her husband if she actually desires to be 
elevated to the higher planetary systems after leaving this body. Besides 
that, it is considered abominable in society if a woman is unfaithful and 
goes searching for another man. Such habits will deter a woman from 
being elevated to the heavenly planets, and the results of such habits are 
very degrading. A married woman should not search for a paramour, for 
this is not sanctioned by the Vedic principles of life. If you think that 
you are very much attached to Me and you want My association, I advise 
you not to personally try to enjoy Me. It is better for you to go home, 
simply talk about Me and think of Me, and by this process of constantly 
remembering Me and chanting My names you will surely be elevated to 
the spiritual platform. There is no need to stand near Me. Please go back 
home.” 
The instruction given herein by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to 
the gopés was not at all sarcastic. Such instructions should be taken very 
seriously by all honest women. The chastity of women is specifically 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
245
stressed herein by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore this 
principle should be followed by any serious woman who wants to be 
elevated to a higher status of life. Kåñëa is the center of all affection for 
all living creatures. When this affection is developed for Kåñëa, then 
one surpasses and transcends all Vedic injunctions. This was possible for 
the gopés because they saw Kåñëa face to face. This is not possible for any 
women in the conditioned state. Unfortunately, sometimes a rascal, 
following the philosophy of monism, or oneness, very irresponsibly takes 
advantage of this räsa-lélä to imitate the behavior of Kåñëa with the 
gopés, entice many innocent women and mislead them in the name of 
spiritual realization. As a warning, Lord Kåñëa has herein hinted that 
what was possible for the gopés is not possible for ordinary women. 
Although a woman can actually be elevated by advanced Kåñëa 
consciousness, she should not be enticed by an imposter who says that he 
is Kåñëa. She should concentrate her devotional activities in chanting 
and meditating upon Kåñëa, as is advised herein. One should not follow 
the men called sahajiyä, the so-called devotees who take everything very 
lightly. 
When Kåñëa spoke in such a discouraging way to the gopés, they became 
very sad, for they thought that their desire to enjoy the räsa dance with 
Kåñëa would be frustrated. Thus they became full of anxiety. Out of 
great sadness, the gopés began to breathe very heavily. Instead of looking 
at Kåñëa face to face, they bowed their heads and looked to the ground, 
and they began to draw various types of curved lines on the ground with 
their toes. They were shedding heavy tears, and their cosmetic 
decorations were being washed from their faces. The water from their 
eyes mixed with the kuìkuma on their breasts and fell to the ground. 
They could not say anything to Kåñëa but simply stood there silently. By 
their silence they expressed that their hearts were grievously wounded. 
The gopés were not ordinary women. In essence they were on an equal 
level with Kåñëa. They are His eternal associates. As it is confirmed in 
the Brahma-saàhitä, they are expansions of the pleasure potency of 
Kåñëa, and as His potency they are nondifferent from Him. Although 
they were depressed by the words of Kåñëa, they did not like to use harsh 
words against Him. Yet they wanted to rebuke Kåñëa for His unkind 
words, and therefore they began to speak in faltering voices. They did 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
246
not like to use harsh words against Kåñëa because He was their dearmost, 
their heart and soul. The gopés had only Kåñëa within their hearts. They 
were completely surrendered and dedicated souls. Naturally, when they 
heard such unkind words, they tried to reply, but in the attempt torrents 
of tears fell from their eyes. Finally they managed to speak. 
“Kåñëa,” they said, “You are very cruel! You should not talk like that. 
We are full-fledged surrendered souls. Please accept us, and don’t talk in 
that cruel way. Of course, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
and You can do whatever You like, but it is not worthy of Your position 
to treat us in such a cruel way. We have come to You, leaving everything 
behind, just to take shelter of Your lotus feet. We know that You are 
completely independent and can do whatever You like, but we request 
You, don’t reject us. We are Your devotees. You should accept us as Lord 
Näräyaëa accepts His devotees. There are many devotees of Lord 
Näräyaëa who worship Him for salvation, and He awards them 
salvation. Similarly, how can You reject us when we have no other 
shelter than Your lotus feet? 
“O dear Kåñëa,” they continued, “You are the supreme instructor. There 
is no doubt about it. Your instructions to women to be faithful to their 
husbands and merciful to their children, to take care of household 
affairs and to be obedient to the elder members of the family, are surely 
just according to the tenets of the çästras. But we know that one may 
perfectly observe all these instructions of the çästras by keeping oneself 
under the protection of Your lotus feet. Our husbands, friends, family 
members and children are all dear and pleasing to us only because of 
Your presence, for You are the Supersoul of all living creatures. Without 
Your presence, one is worthless. When You leave the body, the body 
immediately dies, and according to the injunction of the çästras, a dead 
body must immediately be thrown into a river or burned. Therefore, 
ultimately You are the dearmost personality in this world. By placing our 
faith and love in Your personality, we are assured of never being bereft 
of husband, friends, sons or daughters. If a woman accepts You as the 
supreme husband, then she will never be bereft of her husband, as in the 
bodily concept of life. If we accept You as our ultimate husband, then 
there is no question of being separated, divorced or widowed. You are 
the eternal husband, eternal son, eternal friend and eternal master, and 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
247
one who enters into a relationship with You is eternally happy. Since 
You are the teacher of all religious principles, Your lotus feet have to be 
worshiped first. Accordingly, the çästras state, äcärya-upäsanä: the 
worship of Your lotus feet is the first principle. Besides that, as stated in 
the Bhagavad-gétä, You are the only enjoyer, You are the only proprietor, 
and You are the only friend. As such, we have come to You, leaving 
aside all so-called friends, society and love, and now You have become 
our enjoyer. Let us be everlastingly enjoyed by You. Be our proprietor, 
for that is Your natural claim, and be our supreme friend, for You are 
naturally so. Let us thus embrace You as the supreme beloved.” 
Then the gopés told lotus-eyed Kåñëa, “Please do not discourage our long-
cherished desires to have You as our husband. Any intelligent man who 
cares for his own self-interest reposes all his loving spirit in You. Persons 
who are simply misled by the external energy, who want to be satisfied 
by false concepts, try to enjoy themselves apart from You. The so-called 
husband, friend, son, daughter, father and mother are all simply sources 
of material misery. No one is made happy in this material world by 
having a so-called father, mother, husband, son, daughter and friend. 
Although the father and mother are expected to protect the children, 
there are many children who are suffering for want of food and shelter. 
There are many good physicians, but when a patient dies, no physician 
can revive him. There are many means of protection, but when one is 
doomed, none of the protective measures can help, and without Your 
protection the so-called sources of protection simply become sources of 
continued distress. We therefore appeal to You, dear Lord of all lords, 
please do not kill our long-cherished desires to have You as our supreme 
husband. 
“Dear Kåñëa, as women, we are certainly satisfied when our hearts are 
engaged in the activities of family affairs, but our hearts have already 
been stolen by You. We can no longer engage them in family affairs. 
Besides that, although You have repeatedly asked us to return home, and 
that is a very appropriate instruction, unfortunately we have been 
stunned here. Our legs have no power to move a step from Your lotus 
feet. Therefore, if even at Your request we return home, what shall we 
do there? We have lost all our ability to act without You. Instead of 
engaging our hearts in family affairs as women, we have now developed a 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
248
different type of lust which is continually blazing in our hearts. Now we 
request You, dear Kåñëa, to extinguish that fire with Your beautiful 
smile and the transcendental vibration emanating from Your lips. If You 
do not agree to do us this favor, we shall certainly be burned in the fire 
of separation. In that condition, we shall simply think of You and Your 
beautiful features and give up our bodies immediately. In that way we 
think it will be possible for us to reside at Your lotus feet in the next life. 
Dear Kåñëa, if You say that if we go home our respective husbands will 
satisfy the lusty flame of our desire, we can only say that that is no 
longer possible. You have given us a chance to be enjoyed by You in the 
forest and have touched our breasts once in the past, which we accepted 
as a blessing, as did the goddesses of fortune, who are enjoyed in the 
Vaikuëöhalokas by You. Since we have tasted this transcendental 
enjoyment, we are no longer interested in going to anyone but You for 
the satisfaction of our lust. Dear Kåñëa, the lotus feet of the goddess of 
fortune are always worshiped by the demigods. Although she is always 
resting on Your chest in the Vaikuëöha planets, she underwent great 
austerity and penance to have some shelter at Your lotus feet, which are 
always covered by tulasé leaves. Your lotus feet are the proper shelter of 
Your servitors, and the goddess of fortune, instead of abiding on Your 
chest, comes down and worships Your lotus feet. We have now placed 
ourselves under the dust of Your feet. Please do not reject us, for we are 
fully surrendered souls. 
“Dear Kåñëa, You are known as Hari. You destroy all the miseries of all 
living entities, specifically of those who have left their homes and family 
attachment and have completely taken to You. We have left our homes 
with the hope that we shall completely devote and dedicate our lives to 
Your service. We are simply begging to be engaged as Your servants. We 
do not wish to ask You to accept us as Your wives. Simply accept us as 
Your maidservants. Since You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead 
and like to enjoy the parakéya-rasa and are famous as a transcendental 
woman hunter, we have come to satisfy Your transcendental desires. We 
are also after our own satisfaction, for simply by looking at Your smiling 
face we have become very lusty. We have come before You decorated 
with all ornaments and dress, but until You embrace us, all our clothes 
and beautiful features remain incomplete. You are the Supreme Person, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
249
and if You complete our dressing attempt as the puruña-bhüñaëa, or the 
male ornament, then all our desires and bodily decorations are complete. 
“Dear Kåñëa, we have simply been captivated by seeing You with tilaka 
and with earrings and by seeing Your beautiful face covered with 
scattered hair and bearing Your extraordinary smile. Not only that, but 
we are also attracted by Your arms, which always give assurance to the 
surrendered souls. And although we are also attracted by Your chest, 
which is always embraced by the goddess of fortune, we do not wish to 
take her position. We shall simply be satisfied by being Your 
maidservants. If You accuse us, however, of encouraging prostitution, 
then we can only ask, Where is that woman within these three worlds 
who is not captivated by Your beauty and the rhythmic songs vibrated 
by Your transcendental flute? Within these three worlds there is no 
distinction between men and women in relation to You because both 
men and women belong to the marginal potency, or prakåti. No one is 
actually the enjoyer, or the male; everyone is meant to be enjoyed by 
You. There is no woman within these three worlds who cannot but 
deviate from her path of chastity once she is attracted to You, because 
Your beauty is so sublime that not only men and women but also cows, 
birds, beasts and even trees, fruits and flowers—everyone and 
everything—become enchanted, and what to speak of ourselves? It is, 
however, definitely decided that as Lord Viñëu is always protecting the 
demigods from the onslaught of demons, so You have also advented in 
Våndävana just to give the residents protection from all kinds of distress. 
O dear friend of the distressed, kindly place Your hand on our burning 
breasts as well as on our heads, because we have surrendered unto You as 
Your eternal maidservants. If You think, however, that Your lotuslike 
palms might be burned to ashes if placed on our burning breasts, let us 
assure You that Your palms will feel pleasure instead of pain, as the lotus 
flower, although very delicate and soft, enjoys the scorching heat of the 
sun.” 
Upon hearing the anxious plea of the gopés, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead smiled, and being very kind to the gopés, the Lord, although 
self-sufficient, began to embrace them and kiss them as they desired. 
When Kåñëa, smiling, looked at the faces of the gopés, the beauty of their 
faces became a hundred times enhanced. When He was enjoying them 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
250
in their midst, He appeared just like the full moon surrounded by 
millions of shining stars. Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead, 
surrounded by hundreds of gopés and decorated with a flower garland of 
many colors, began to wander within the Våndävana forest, sometimes 
singing to Himself and sometimes singing with the gopés. In this way the 
Lord and the gopés reached the cool, sandy bank of the Yamunä, where 
there were lilies and lotus flowers. In such a transcendental atmosphere, 
the gopés and Kåñëa began to enjoy one another. While they were 
walking on the bank of the Yamunä, Kåñëa would sometimes put His 
arms around a gopé’s head, breast or waist. Pinching one another and 
joking and looking at one another, they enjoyed. When Kåñëa touched 
the bodies of the gopés, their lust to embrace Him increased. They all 
enjoyed these pastimes. Thus the gopés were blessed with all mercy by 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for they enjoyed His company 
without a tinge of mundane sex life. 
The gopés, however, soon began to feel very proud, thinking themselves 
to be the most fortunate women in the universe due to being favored by 
the company of Kåñëa. Lord Kåñëa, who is known as Keçava, could 
immediately understand their pride caused by their great fortune of 
enjoying Him personally, and in order to show them His causeless mercy 
and to curb their false pride, He immediately disappeared from the 
scene, exhibiting His opulence of renunciation. The Supreme 
Personality of Godhead is always full with six kinds of opulences, and 
this is an instance of the opulence of renunciation. This renunciation 
confirms Kåñëa’s total nonattachment. He is always self-sufficient and is 
not dependent on anything. This is the platform on which His 
transcendental pastimes are enacted. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-ninth Chapter of 
Kåñëa, “The Räsa Dance: Introduction.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
251
CHAPTER THIRTY 
Kåñëa’s Hiding from the Gopés 
 
When Kåñëa suddenly disappeared from the company of the gopés, they 
searched for Him everywhere. After not finding Him anywhere, they 
became afraid and almost mad after Him. They were simply thinking of 
the pastimes of Kåñëa in great love and affection. Being absorbed in 
thought of Him, they experienced loss of memory, and with dampened 
eyes they saw the very pastimes of Kåñëa, His beautiful talks with them, 
His embracing, kissing and other activities. Being so attracted to Kåñëa, 
they imitated His dancing, His walking and His smiling, as if they 
themselves were Kåñëa. Due to Kåñëa’s absence, they all became crazy; 
each one of them told the others that she was Kåñëa Himself. Soon they 
all assembled together and chanted Kåñëa’s name very loudly as they 
moved from one part of the forest to another, searching for Him. 
Actually, Kåñëa is all-pervasive; He is in the sky, and He is in the forest; 
He is within the heart, and He is always everywhere. The gopés therefore 
began to question the trees and plants about Kåñëa. There were various 
types of big trees and small plants in the forest, and the gopés addressed 
them: “Dear banyan tree, have you seen the son of Mahäräja Nanda 
passing this way, laughing and playing on His flute? He has stolen our 
hearts and gone away. If you have seen Him, kindly inform us which way 
He has gone. Dear açoka tree, dear näga flower tree and campaka flower 
tree, have you seen the younger brother of Balaräma pass this way? He 
has disappeared because of our pride.” The gopés were aware of the 
reason for Kåñëa’s sudden disappearance. They could understand that 
when they had been enjoying Kåñëa they thought themselves to be the 
most fortunate women within the universe, and since they were feeling 
proud, Kåñëa had disappeared immediately just to curb their pride. Kåñëa 
does not like His devotees to be proud of their service to Him. He 
accepts everyone’s service, but He does not like one devotee to proudly 
consider himself better than others. If sometimes there are such feelings, 
Kåñëa ends them by changing His attitude toward the devotee. 
The gopés then addressed the tulasé plants: “Dear tulasé, you are much 
beloved by Lord Kåñëa because your leaves are always at His lotus feet. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
252
Dear mälaté flower, dear mallikä flower, dear jasmine flower, all of you 
must have been touched by Kåñëa while He was passing this way after 
giving us transcendental enjoyment. Have you seen Mädhava passing 
this way? O mango trees, O trees of jackfruit, O pear trees and äsana 
trees! O blackberries and bael trees and trees of the kadamba flower—
you are all very pious trees to be living on the bank of the Yamunä. 
Kåñëa must have passed through this way. Will you kindly let us know 
which way He has gone?” 
The gopés then looked upon the ground they were traversing and began 
to address the earth, “Dear earthly planet, we do not know how many 
penances and austerities you have undergone to be now living with the 
footprints of Lord Kåñëa upon you. You are very jolly; the hairs on your 
body are these jubilant trees and plants. Lord Kåñëa must have been very 
much pleased with you; otherwise how could He have embraced you in 
the form of Varäha the boar? When you were submerged in water, He 
delivered you, taking the whole weight of your existence on His tusks.” 
After addressing the innumerable trees and plants and the earth, they 
turned their faces toward the beautiful deer who were looking on them 
very pleasingly. “It appears,” they addressed the deer, “that Kåñëa, who is 
the Supreme Näräyaëa Himself, must have passed through this way 
along with His companion, Lakñmé, the goddess of fortune. Otherwise, 
how is it possible that the aroma of His garland, which is smeared with 
the red kuìkuma from the breasts of the goddess of fortune, can be 
perceived in the breeze blowing here? It appears that they must have 
passed through here and touched your bodies, and thus you are feeling so 
pleasant and are looking toward us with sympathy. Will you kindly, 
therefore, inform us which way Kåñëa has gone? Kåñëa is the well-wisher 
of Våndävana. He is as kind to you as to us; therefore after leaving us, 
He must have been present in your company. O fortunate trees, we are 
thinking of Kåñëa, the younger brother of Balaräma. While passing 
through here, with one hand resting on the shoulder of the goddess of 
fortune and the other hand twirling a lotus flower, He must have been 
very pleased to accept your obeisances, and He must have glanced at you 
with great pleasure.” 
Some of the gopés then addressed their gopé friends: “Dear friends, why 
don’t you question these creepers who are so jubilantly embracing the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
253
big trees as if the trees were their husbands? It appears that the flowers 
of the creepers must have been touched by the nails of Kåñëa. 
Otherwise, how could they feel so jubilant?” 
After searching for Kåñëa here and there, the gopés became fatigued, and 
then they began to talk like madwomen. They could only satisfy 
themselves by imitating the different pastimes of Kåñëa. One of them 
imitated the demon Pütanä, and one of them imitated Kåñëa and sucked 
her breast. One gopé imitated a hand-driven cart, and another gopé lay 
down beneath the cart and threw up her legs, touching the wheels of the 
cart, as Kåñëa did to kill the demon Çakaöäsura. They imitated child 
Kåñëa, lying down on the ground, and one gopé became the demon 
Tåëävarta and carried the small child Kåñëa by force into the sky; and 
one of the gopés began to imitate Kåñëa while He was attempting to walk, 
ringing His ankle bells. Two gopés imitated Kåñëa and Balaräma, and 
many others imitated Their cowherd boyfriends. One gopé assumed the 
form of Bakäsura, and another forced her to fall down as the demon 
Bakäsura did when he was killed; similarly, another gopé defeated 
Vatsäsura. Just as Kåñëa used to call His cows by their different names, 
so the gopés imitated Him, calling the cows by their respective names. 
One of the gopés began to play on a flute, and another praised her the 
way Kåñëa’s boyfriends praised Him while He played on His flute. One 
of the gopés took another gopé on her shoulders, just as Kåñëa used to 
take His boyfriends. Absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa, the gopé who was 
carrying her friend began to boast that she was Kåñëa herself: “All of you 
just see my movement!” One of the gopés raised her hand with her 
covering garments and said, “Now don’t be afraid of the torrents of rain 
and severe hurricanes. I’ll save you!” In this way she imitated the lifting 
of Govardhana Hill. One gopé forcibly put her feet on the head of 
another gopé and said, “You rascal Käliya! I shall punish you severely. 
You must leave this place. I have descended on this earth to punish all 
kinds of miscreants!” Another gopé told her friends, “Just see! The flames 
of the forest fire are coming to devour us. Please close your eyes and I 
shall immediately save you from this imminent danger.” 
In this way all the gopés were madly feeling the absence of Kåñëa. They 
inquired about Him from the trees and plants. In some places they found 
the imprints of the marks on the soles of His feet—namely the flag, the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
254
lotus flower, the trident, the thunderbolt, etc. After seeing those 
footprints, they exclaimed, “Oh, here is the impression of the marks on 
the soles of Kåñëa’s feet. All the marks, such as the flag, the lotus flower, 
the trident and the thunderbolt, are distinctly visible here.” They began 
to follow the footprints, and shortly they saw another set of footprints 
beside them, and immediately they became very sorry. “Dear friends, just 
see! Whose are these other footprints? They are beside the footprints of 
the son of Mahäräja Nanda. It is certainly Kåñëa passing through, resting 
His hand on some other gopé, exactly as an elephant goes side by side 
with his beloved mate. We must, therefore, understand that this 
particular gopé served Kåñëa with greater affectionate love than 
ourselves. Because of this, although He has left us, He could not leave 
Her company. He has taken Her along with Him. Dear friends, just 
imagine how the dust of this place is transcendentally glorious. The dust 
of the lotus feet of Kåñëa is worshiped even by Lord Brahmä and Lord 
Çiva and the goddess of fortune, Lakñmé. But at the same time, we are 
very sorry that this particular gopé has gone along with Kåñëa, for She is 
sharing the nectar of Kåñëa’s kisses and leaving us aside to lament. O 
friends, just see! At this particular spot we do not see the footprints of 
that gopé. It appears that because there were some pinpricks from the 
dried grass, Kåñëa took Rädhäräëé on His shoulder. Oh, She is so dear to 
Him! Kåñëa must have picked some flowers in this spot to satisfy 
Rädhäräëé, because here, where He stood erect to get the flowers from 
the high branches of the tree, we find only half the impression of His 
feet. Dear friends, just see how Kåñëa must have sat down here with 
Rädhäräëé and tried to set flowers in Her hair. You can be certain that 
both of Them sat together here.” Kåñëa is self-sufficient; He has nothing 
to enjoy from any other source, yet just to satisfy His devotee He treated 
Rädhäräëé exactly as a lusty boy treats his girlfriend. Kåñëa is so kind 
that He always tolerates the disturbances created by His girlfriends. 
In this way, all the gopés pointed out the faults of the particular gopé who 
had been taken alone by Kåñëa. They said that the chief gopé, Rädhäräëé, 
who had been taken alone by Kåñëa, must be very proud of Her position, 
thinking Herself the greatest of the gopés. “Yet how could Kåñëa take 
Her away alone, leaving all of us aside, unless She is extraordinarily 
qualified and beautiful? She must have taken Kåñëa into the deep forest 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
255
and told Him, “My dear Kåñëa, I am now very tired. I cannot go any 
further. Please carry Me wherever You like.’ When Kåñëa was spoken to 
in this way, He might have told Rädhäräëé, “All right, better get on My 
shoulder.’ But immediately Kåñëa must have disappeared, and now 
Rädhäräëé must be lamenting for Him, “My dear lover, My dearest, You 
are so fine and so powerful. Where have You gone? I am nothing but 
Your most obedient maidservant. I am very much aggrieved. Please come 
and be with Me again.’ Kåñëa, however, is not coming to Her. He must 
be watching Her from a distant place and enjoying Her sorrow.” 
All the gopés then went further and further into the forest, searching out 
Kåñëa, but when they learned that actually Rädhäräëé was left alone by 
Kåñëa, they became very sorry. This is the test of Kåñëa consciousness. 
In the beginning they were a little envious that Kåñëa had taken 
Rädhäräëé alone, leaving aside all the other gopés, but as soon as they 
knew that Kåñëa had also left Rädhäräëé and that She was alone 
lamenting for Him, they became more sympathetic to Her. The gopés 
found Rädhäräëé and heard everything from Her—about how She 
misbehaved with Kåñëa and how She was proud and was insulted for Her 
pride. After hearing all this, they became actually very sympathetic. 
Then all the gopés, including Rädhäräëé, proceeded further into the 
forest, until they could no longer see the moonlight. 
When they saw that it was getting gradually darker, they stopped. Their 
mind and intelligence became absorbed in thoughts of Kåñëa; they all 
imitated the activities of Kåñëa and His speeches. Due to their heart and 
soul being completely given to Kåñëa, they began to chant His glories, 
completely forgetting their family interests. In this way, all the gopés 
returned to the bank of the Yamunä and assembled there, and expecting 
that Kåñëa must return to them, they simply engaged in chanting the 
glories of Çré Kåñëa—Hare Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare / 
Hare Räma, Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirtieth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Kåñëa’s Hiding from the Gopés.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
256
CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE 
Songs by the Gopés 
 
One gopé said, “My dear Kåñëa, ever since You took Your birth in this 
land of Vrajabhümi, everything appears to be glorious. The land of 
Våndävana has become glorious, and it is as if the goddess of fortune is 
personally always existing here. But it is only we who are very unhappy, 
because we are searching for You but cannot see You with our greatest 
effort. Our life is completely dependent upon You; therefore we request 
that You again come to us.” 
Another gopé said, “My dear Kåñëa, You are the life and soul even of the 
lotus flower that grows on the water of lakes made transparent by the 
clear rains of autumn. Although the lotus flowers are so beautiful, 
without Your glance they fade away. Similarly, without You, we are also 
dying. Actually, we are neither Your wives nor slaves. You never spent 
any money for us, yet we are simply attracted by Your glance. Now, if we 
die without receiving Your glance, You’ll be responsible for our deaths. 
Certainly the killing of women is a great sin, and if You do not come to 
see us and we die, You will suffer the reactions of sin. So please come see 
us. Do not think that one can be killed only by certain weapons. We are 
being killed by Your absence. You should consider how You are 
responsible for killing women. We are always grateful to You because 
You have protected us many times: from the poisonous water of the 
Yamunä, from the serpent Käliya, from Bakäsura, from the anger of 
Indra and his torrents of rain, from the forest fire and so many other 
incidents. You are the greatest and most powerful of all. It is wonderful 
for You to protect us from so many dangers, but we are surprised that 
You are neglecting us at this moment. 
“Dear Kåñëa, dear friend, we know very well that You are not actually 
the son of mother Yaçodä or the cowherd man Nanda Mahäräja. You are 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the Supersoul of all living 
entities. You have, out of Your own causeless mercy, appeared in this 
world, requested by Lord Brahmä for the protection of the world. It is by 
Your kindness only that You have appeared in the dynasty of Yadu. O 
best in the dynasty of Yadu, if anyone afraid of this materialistic way of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
257
life takes shelter at Your lotus feet, You never deny him protection. 
Your movements are sweet, and You are independent, touching the 
goddess of fortune with one hand and in the other bearing a lotus 
flower. That is Your extraordinary feature. Please, therefore, come 
before us and bless us with the lotus flower in Your hand. 
“Dear Kåñëa, You are the killer of all the fears of the inhabitants of 
Våndävana. You are the supremely powerful hero, and we know that 
You can kill the unnecessary pride of Your devotee as well as the pride 
of women like us simply by Your beautiful smile. We are simply Your 
maidservants and slaves; please, therefore, accept us by showing us Your 
beautiful lotuslike face. 
“Dear Kåñëa, actually we have become very lusty, having been touched 
by Your lotus feet. Your lotus feet certainly kill all kinds of sinful 
activities of devotees who have taken shelter there. You are so kind that 
even the ordinary animals take shelter under Your lotus feet. Your lotus 
feet are also the residence of the goddess of fortune, yet You danced on 
the heads of the Käliya serpent with them. Now we are requesting You 
to kindly place Your lotus feet on our breasts and pacify our lusty desires 
to touch You. 
“O Lord, Your attractive eyes, like the lotus, are so nice and pleasing. 
Your sweet words are so fascinating that they please even the greatest 
scholars, who also become attracted to You. We are also attracted by 
Your speaking and by the beauty of Your face and eyes. Please, therefore, 
satisfy us by Your nectarean kisses. Dear Lord, words spoken by You or 
words describing Your activities are full of nectar, and simply by 
speaking or hearing Your words one can be saved from the blazing fire of 
material existence. Great demigods like Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva are 
always engaged in chanting the glories of Your words. They do so to 
eradicate the sinful activities of all living entities in the material world. 
If one simply tries to hear Your transcendental words, he can very 
quickly be elevated to the platform of pious activities. For the Vaiñëavas, 
Your words give transcendental pleasure, and saintly persons who are 
engaged in distributing Your transcendental message all over the world 
are first-class charitable persons.” (This was confirmed by Rüpa Gosvämé 
when he addressed Lord Caitanya as the most munificent incarnation 
because He distributed the words of Kåñëa and love of Kåñëa free of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
258
charge all over the world.) 
“Dear Kåñëa,” the gopés continued, “You are very cunning. You can 
imagine how much we are distressed simply by remembering Your 
cunning smile, Your pleasing glance, Your walking with us in the forest 
of Våndävana, and Your auspicious meditations. Your talks with us in 
lonely places were heartwarming. Now we are all aggrieved to remember 
Your behavior. Please save us. Dear Kåñëa, certainly You know how 
much we are saddened when You go out of Våndävana village to tend 
the cows in the forest. How we are afflicted simply to think that Your 
soft lotus feet are being pricked by the dry grass and the tiny stones in 
the forest! We are so attached to You that we always think simply of 
Your lotus feet. 
“O Kåñëa, when You return from the pasturing ground with the animals, 
we see Your face covered by Your curly hair and dusted by the hoof dust 
of the cows. We see Your mildly smiling face, and our desire to enjoy 
You increases. O dear Kåñëa, You are the supreme lover, and You always 
give shelter to surrendered souls. You fulfill everyone’s desire; Your lotus 
feet are worshiped even by Lord Brahmä, the creator of the universe. To 
whomever worships Your lotus feet, You without a doubt always bestow 
Your benedictions. So kindly be pleased with us and keep Your lotus feet 
on our breasts and thus relieve our present distresses. Dear Kåñëa, we are 
seeking Your kisses, which You offer even to Your flute. The vibration 
of Your flute enchants the whole world and our hearts also. Kindly, 
therefore, return and kiss us with Your mouth of nectar.” 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-first Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Songs by the Gopés.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
259
CHAPTER THIRTY-TWO 
Kåñëa Returns to the Gopés 
 
When Lord Kåñëa finally reappeared among the assembled gopés, He 
looked very beautiful, just befitting a person with all kinds of opulences. 
In the Brahma-saàhitä it is stated, änanda-cin-maya-rasa-
pratibhävitäbhiù: Kåñëa alone is not particularly beautiful, but when His 
energy—especially His pleasure energy, represented by Rädhäräëé—
expands, He looks very magnificent. The Mäyäväda conception of the 
perfection of the Absolute Truth without potency is due to insufficient 
knowledge. Actually, outside the exhibition of His different potencies, 
the Absolute Truth is not complete. Änanda-cin-maya-rasa means that 
His body is a transcendental form of eternal bliss and knowledge. Kåñëa 
is always surrounded by different potencies, and therefore He is perfect 
and beautiful. We understand from the Brahma-saàhitä and Skanda 
Puräëa that Kåñëa is always surrounded by many thousands of goddesses 
of fortune. The gopés are all goddesses of fortune, and Kåñëa took them 
hand in hand on the bank of the Yamunä. 
It is said in the Skanda Puräëa that out of many thousands of gopés, 
16,000 are predominant, out of those 16,000, 108 are especially 
prominent, out of these 108 gopés, eight gopés are still more prominent, 
out of those eight gopés, Rädhäräëé and Candrävalé are even more 
prominent, and out of these two gopés, Rädhäräëé is the most prominent. 
When Kåñëa entered the forest on the bank of the Yamunä, the 
moonlight dissipated the surrounding darkness. Due to the season, 
flowers like the kunda and kadamba were blooming, and a gentle breeze 
was carrying their aroma. Due to the aroma, the bees were also flying in 
the breeze, thinking that the aroma was honey. The gopés made a seat for 
Kåñëa by leveling the soft sand and placing cloths over it. 
The gopés who were gathered there had almost all been followers of the 
Vedas. In their previous births, during Lord Rämacandra’s advent, they 
had been Vedic scholars who desired the association of Lord 
Rämacandra in conjugal love. Rämacandra had given them the 
benediction that they would be present for the advent of Lord Kåñëa 
and He would fulfill their desires. During Kåñëa’s advent, the Vedic 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
260
scholars took birth in the shape of the gopés in Våndävana; as young 
gopés, they got the association of Kåñëa in fulfillment of their previous 
birth’s desire. The ultimate goal of their perfect desire was attained, and 
they were so joyous that they had nothing further to desire. This is 
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä: if one attains the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, then he has no desire for anything. When the gopés had 
Kåñëa in their company, not only all their grief but their lamenting in 
the absence of Kåñëa was relieved. They felt they had no desire to be 
fulfilled. Fully satisfied in the company of Kåñëa, they spread their cloths 
on the ground. These garments were made of fine linen and smeared 
with the red kuìkuma which decorated their breasts. With great care 
they spread a sitting place for Kåñëa. Kåñëa was their life and soul, and 
they created a very comfortable seat for Him. 
Sitting on the seat amongst the gopés, Kåñëa became more beautiful. 
Great yogés like Lord Çiva, Lord Brahmä or even Lord Çeña and others 
always try to fix their attention upon Kåñëa in their hearts, but here the 
gopés actually saw Kåñëa seated before them on their cloths. In the 
society of the gopés, Kåñëa looked very beautiful. They were the most 
beautiful damsels within the three worlds, and they assembled together 
around Kåñëa. 
It may be asked herein how Kåñëa seated Himself beside so many gopés 
and yet sat alone. There is a significant word in this verse: éçvara. As it is 
stated in the Bhagavad-gétä, éçvaraù sarva-bhütänäm [Bg. 18.61]. Éçvara 
refers to the Supreme Lord as the Supersoul seated in everyone’s heart. 
Kåñëa also manifested this potency of expansion as Paramätmä in this 
gathering with the gopés. Kåñëa was sitting by the side of each gopé, 
unseen by the others. Kåñëa was so kind to the gopés that instead of 
sitting in their hearts to be appreciated in yogic meditation, He seated 
Himself by their sides. By seating Himself outside, He showed special 
favor to the gopés, who were the selected beauties of all creation. Having 
gotten their most beloved Lord, the gopés began to please Him by moving 
their eyebrows and smiling and also by suppressing their anger. Some of 
them took His lotus feet in their laps and massaged them. And while 
smiling, they confidentially expressed their suppressed anger and said, 
“Dear Kåñëa, we are ordinary women of Våndävana, and we do not know 
much about Vedic knowledge—what is right and what is wrong. We 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
261
therefore put a question to You, and, since You are very learned, You 
can answer it properly. In dealings between lovers, we find that there are 
three classes of men. One class simply receives, another class 
reciprocates favorably, even if the lover is very contrary, and the third 
class neither acts contrary nor answers favorably in dealings of love. So 
out of these three classes, which do You prefer, or which do You call 
honest?” 
In answer, Kåñëa said, “My dear friends, persons who simply reciprocate 
the loving dealings of the other party are just like merchants. They give 
in loving affairs as much as they get from the other party. Practically 
there is no question of love. It is simply self-interested or self-centered 
business dealing. Even those without a tinge of loving affairs are better 
than these merchants. Better than the first class is the second class of 
men, who love in spite of the opposite party’s contrariness. Such sincere 
love can be seen when the father and mother love their children in spite 
of their children’s neglect. The third class neither reciprocates nor 
neglects. They can be further divided into two classes. One is the self-
satisfied, who do not require anyone’s love. They are called ätmäräma, 
which means they are absorbed in the thought of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead and so do not care whether one loves them or 
not. But another class are ungrateful men. They are called callous. The 
men in this group revolt against superior persons. For instance, a son, in 
spite of receiving all kinds of things from loving parents, may be callous 
and not reciprocate. Those in this class are generally known as guru-
druhaù, which means they receive favors from the parents or the 
spiritual master and yet neglect them.” 
Kåñëa indirectly answered the questions of the gopés, even those 
questions which implied that Kåñëa did not properly reciprocate their 
dealings. In answer, Kåñëa said that He, as the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, is self-satisfied. He does not require anyone’s love, but at the 
same time He said that He is not ungrateful. 
“My dear friends,” Kåñëa continued, “you might be aggrieved by My 
words and acts, but you must know that sometimes I do not reciprocate 
My devotees’ dealings with Me. My devotees are very much attached to 
Me, but sometimes I do not reciprocate their feelings properly in order 
to increase their love for Me more and more. If I can very easily be 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
262
approached by them, they might think, “Kåñëa is so easily available.’ So 
sometimes I do not respond. If a person has no money but after some 
time accumulates some wealth and then loses it, he will think of the lost 
property twenty-four hours a day. Similarly, in order to increase the love 
of My devotees, sometimes I appear to be lost to them, and instead of 
forgetting Me, they feel their loving sentiments for Me increase. My 
dear friends, do not think for a moment that I have been dealing with 
you as I do with ordinary devotees. I know what you are. You have 
forsaken all kinds of social and religious obligations; you have given up 
all connection with your parents. Without caring for social convention 
and religious obligations, you have come to Me and loved Me, and I am 
so much obliged to you that I cannot treat you as ordinary devotees. Do 
not think that I was away from you. I was near to you. I was simply 
seeing how much you were anxious for Me in My absence. So please do 
not try to find fault with Me. Because you consider Me so dear to you, 
kindly excuse Me if I have done anything wrong. I cannot repay your 
continuous love for Me, even throughout the lifetimes of the demigods 
in the heavenly planets. It is impossible to repay you or show enough 
gratitude for your love; therefore please be satisfied by your own pious 
activities. You have displayed exemplary attraction for Me, overcoming 
the greatest difficulties arising from family connections. Please be 
satisfied with your highly exemplary character, for it is not possible for 
Me to repay My debt to you.” 
The exemplary character of devotional service manifested by the 
devotees of Våndävana is the purest type of devotion. It is enjoined in 
authoritative çästras that devotional service must be ahaituké and 
apratihatä. This means that devotional service to Kåñëa cannot be 
checked by political or religious convention. The stage of devotional 
service is always transcendental. The gopés particularly showed pure 
devotional service towards Kåñëa, so much so that Kåñëa Himself 
remained indebted to them. Lord Caitanya thus said that the devotional 
service manifested by the gopés in Våndävana excelled all other methods 
of approaching the Supreme Personality of Godhead. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-second Chapter of 
Kåñëa, “Kåñëa Returns to the Gopés.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
263
CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE 
Description of the Räsa Dance 
 
Thus hearing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kåñëa, speaking to 
pacify them, the gopés became very much pleased. They became 
completely relieved of the great suffering of separation, not only by 
hearing the words of the Supreme Personality of Godhead but also by 
touching His hands and legs. After this, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead began His räsa dance. A dance in the midst of many girls is 
called a räsa dance. So Kåñëa began to dance among the most beautiful 
and fortunate girls within the three worlds. The gopés of Våndävana, 
who were so attracted to Him, danced with Kåñëa, hand in hand. 
Kåñëa’s räsa dance should never be compared to any kind of material 
dance, such as a ball dance or a society dance. The räsa dance is a 
completely spiritual performance. In order to establish this fact, Kåñëa, 
the supreme mystic, expanded Himself into many forms and stood beside 
each gopé. Placing His hands on the shoulders of the gopés on both sides 
of Him, He began to dance in their midst. The mystic expansions of 
Kåñëa were not perceived by the gopés because Kåñëa appeared alone to 
each of them. Each gopé thought that Kåñëa was dancing with her alone. 
Above that wonderful dance flew many airplanes carrying the denizens 
of the heavenly planets, who were very eager to see the wonderful dance 
of Kåñëa with the gopés. The Gandharvas and Kinnaras began to sing, 
and, accompanied by their respective wives, all the Gandharvas began to 
shower flowers on the dancers. 
As the gopés and Kåñëa danced together, a very blissful musical sound 
was produced from the tinkling of their bells, ornaments and bangles. It 
appeared that Kåñëa was a greenish sapphire locket in the midst of a 
golden necklace decorated with valuable stones. While Kåñëa and the 
gopés danced, they displayed extraordinary bodily features. The 
movements of their legs, their placing their hands on one another, the 
movements of their eyebrows, their smiling, the movements of the 
breasts of the gopés and their clothes, their earrings, their cheeks, their 
hair with flowers—as they sang and danced these combined to appear 
like clouds, thunder, snow and lightning. Kåñëa’s bodily features 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
264
appeared just like a group of clouds, the gopés’ songs were like thunder, 
their beauty appeared to be just like lightning in the sky, and the drops 
of perspiration visible on their faces appeared like falling snow. In this 
way, the gopés and Kåñëa fully engaged in dancing. 
The necks of the gopés became tinted with red due to their desire to 
enjoy Kåñëa more and more. To satisfy them, Kåñëa began to clap His 
hands in time with their singing. Actually the whole world is full of 
Kåñëa’s singing, but it is appreciated in different ways by different kinds 
of living entities. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä: ye yathä mäà 
prapadyante täàs tathaiva bhajämy aham [Bg. 4.11]. Kåñëa is dancing, and 
every living entity is also dancing, but there is a difference between the 
dancing in the spiritual world and that in the material world. This is 
expressed by the author of the Caitanya-caritämåta, who says that the 
master dancer is Kåñëa and everyone else is His servant. Everyone is 
trying to imitate Kåñëa’s dancing. Those who are actually in Kåñëa 
consciousness respond rightly to the dancing of Kåñëa: they do not try to 
dance independently. But those in the material world try to imitate 
Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The living entities are 
dancing under the direction of Kåñëa’s mäyä and are thinking that they 
are equal to Kåñëa. But this is not a fact. In Kåñëa consciousness, this 
misconception is absent, for a person in Kåñëa consciousness knows that 
Kåñëa is the supreme master and everyone is His servant. One has to 
dance to please Kåñëa, not to imitate or to attempt to become equal to 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The gopés wanted to please Kåñëa, 
and therefore as Kåñëa sang, they responded and encouraged Him by 
saying, “Well done, well done.” Sometimes they presented beautiful 
music for His pleasure, and He responded by praising their singing. 
When some of the gopés became very tired from dancing and moving 
their bodies, they placed their hands on the shoulders of Çré Kåñëa. Then 
their hair loosened and flowers fell to the ground. When they placed 
their hands on Kåñëa’s shoulder they became overwhelmed by the 
fragrance of His body, which emanated from the lotus, other aromatic 
flowers and the pulp of sandalwood. They became filled with attraction 
for Him, and they began to kiss Him. Some gopés touched Kåñëa cheek to 
cheek, and Kåñëa began to offer them chewed betel nuts from His 
mouth, which they accepted with great pleasure by kissing. And by 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
265
accepting those betel nuts, the gopés spiritually advanced. 
The gopés became tired after long singing and dancing. Kåñëa was 
dancing beside them, and to alleviate their fatigue they took Çré Kåñëa’s 
hand and placed it on their raised breasts. Kåñëa’s hand, as well as the 
breasts of the gopés, are eternally auspicious; therefore when they 
combined, both of them became spiritually enhanced. The gopés so 
enjoyed the company of Kåñëa, the husband of the goddess of fortune, 
that they forgot that they had any other husbands in the world, and 
upon being embraced by the arms of Kåñëa and dancing and singing 
with Him, they forgot everything. Çrémad-Bhägavatam thus describes the 
beauty of the gopés while they were räsa dancing with Kåñëa. There were 
lotus flowers over both their ears, and their faces were decorated with 
sandalwood pulp. They wore tilaka, and there were drops of perspiration 
on their smiling mouths. From their feet came the tinkling sound of 
ankle bells and bangles. The flowers within their hair were falling to the 
lotus feet of Kåñëa, and He was very satisfied. 
As stated in the Brahma-saàhitä, all these gopés are expansions of 
Kåñëa’s pleasure potency. Touching their bodies with His hands and 
looking at their pleasing eyes, Kåñëa enjoyed the gopés exactly as a child 
enjoys playing with the reflection of his body in a mirror. When Kåñëa 
touched the different parts of their bodies, the gopés felt surcharged with 
spiritual energy. They could not adjust their loosened clothes, although 
they tried to keep them adjusted properly. Their hair and garments 
became scattered, and their ornaments loosened as they forgot 
themselves in the company of Kåñëa. 
While Kåñëa was enjoying the company of the gopés in the räsa dance, 
the astonished demigods and their wives gathered in the sky. The moon, 
being afflicted with a sort of lust, began to watch the dance and became 
stunned with wonder. The gopés had prayed to the goddess Kätyäyané to 
have Kåñëa as their husband. Now Kåñëa was fulfilling their desire by 
expanding Himself in as many forms as there were gopés and enjoying 
them exactly like a husband. 
Çréla Çukadeva Gosvämé has remarked that Kåñëa is self-sufficient—He 
is ätmäräma. He doesn’t need anyone else for His satisfaction. Because 
the gopés wanted Kåñëa as their husband, He fulfilled their desire. When 
Kåñëa saw that the gopés were tired from dancing with Him, He 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
266
immediately began to wipe His hands over their faces so that their 
fatigue would be relieved. In order to reciprocate the kind hospitality of 
Kåñëa, the gopés began to look at Him lovingly. They were overjoyed by 
the auspicious touch of the hand of Kåñëa. Their smiling cheeks shone 
with beauty, and they began to sing the glories of Kåñëa with 
transcendental pleasure. As pure devotees, the more the gopés enjoyed 
Kåñëa’s company, the more they became enlightened with His glories, 
and thus they reciprocated with Him. They wanted to satisfy Kåñëa by 
glorifying His transcendental pastimes. Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality 
of Godhead, the master of all masters, and the gopés wanted to worship 
Him for His unusual exhibition of mercy upon them. 
The gopés and Kåñëa entered the water of the Yamunä just to relieve 
their fatigue from the räsa dance. The lily flower garlands around the 
necks of the gopés were strewn to pieces due to their embracing the body 
of Kåñëa, and the flowers were reddish from being smeared with the 
kuìkuma on their breasts. The bumblebees were humming about in 
order to get honey from the flowers. Kåñëa and the gopés entered the 
water of the Yamunä just as an elephant enters a water tank with his 
many female companions. Both the gopés and Kåñëa forgot their real 
identities, playing in the water, enjoying each other’s company and 
relieving the fatigue of räsa dancing. The gopés began to splash water on 
the body of Kåñëa, all the while smiling, and Kåñëa enjoyed this. As 
Kåñëa was taking pleasure in the joking words and splashing water, the 
demigods in the heavenly planets showered flowers. The demigods thus 
praised the superexcellent räsa dance of Kåñëa, the supreme enjoyer, and 
His pastimes with the gopés in the water of the Yamunä. 
After this, Lord Kåñëa and the gopés came out of the water and began to 
stroll along the bank of the Yamunä, where a nice breeze was blowing, 
carrying the aroma of different kinds of flowers over the water and land. 
While strolling on the bank of the Yamunä, Kåñëa recited various kinds 
of poetry. He thus enjoyed the company of the gopés in the soothing 
moonlight of autumn. 
Sex desire is especially excited in the autumn season, but the wonderful 
thing about Kåñëa’s association with the gopés is that there was no 
question of sex desire. It was, as clearly stated in the Bhägavata 
description by Çukadeva Gosvämé, avaruddha-saurata—the sex impulse 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
267
was completely controlled. There is a distinction between Lord Kåñëa’s 
dancing with the gopés and the ordinary dancing of living entities within 
the material world. In order to clear up further misconceptions about 
the räsa dance and the affairs of Kåñëa and the gopés, Mahäräja Parékñit, 
the hearer of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, told Çukadeva Gosvämé, “Kåñëa 
appeared on the earth to establish the regulative principles of religion 
and to curb the predominance of irreligion. But the behavior of Kåñëa 
and the gopés might encourage irreligious principles in the material 
world. I am simply surprised that He would act in such a way, enjoying 
the company of others’ wives in the dead of night.” This statement of 
Mahäräja Parékñit’s was very much appreciated by Çukadeva Gosvämé. 
The answer anticipates the abominable acts of the Mäyävädé 
impersonalists who place themselves in the position of Kåñëa and enjoy 
the company of young girls and women. 
The basic Vedic injunctions never allow a person to enjoy sex with any 
woman except his own wife. Kåñëa’s appreciation of the gopés appeared 
to be distinctly in violation of these rules. Mahäräja Parékñit understood 
the total situation from Çukadeva Gosvämé, yet to further clarify the 
transcendental nature of Kåñëa and the gopés in the räsa dance, he 
expressed his surprise. This is very important in order to check the 
unrestricted association with women by the präkåta-sahajiyäs. 
In his statement, Mahäräja Parékñit has used several important words 
which require clarification. The first word, jugupsitam, means 
“abominable.” The first doubt of Mahäräja Parékñit was as follows: Lord 
Kåñëa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had advented 
Himself to establish religious principles. Why then did He mix with 
others’ wives in the dead of night and enjoy dancing, embracing and 
kissing? According to the Vedic injunctions, this is not allowed. Also, 
when the gopés first came to Him, He gave instructions to them to return 
to their homes. To call the wives of other persons or young girls and 
enjoy dancing with them is certainly abominable according to the Vedas. 
Why should Kåñëa have done this? 
Another word used here is äpta-käma. Some may take it for granted that 
Kåñëa was very lusty among young girls, but Parékñit Mahäräja said that 
this was not possible. He could not be lusty. First of all, from the 
material calculation He was only eight years old. At that age a boy 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
268
cannot be lusty. Äpta-käma means that the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead is self-satisfied. Even if He were lusty, He doesn’t need to take 
help from others to satisfy His lusty desires. The next point is that, 
although not lusty Himself, He might have been seduced by the lusty 
desires of the gopés. But Mahäräja Parékñit then used another word, yadu-
pati, which indicates that Kåñëa is the most exalted personality in the 
dynasty of the Yadus. The kings in the dynasty of Yadu were considered 
to be the most pious, and their descendants were also like that. Having 
taken birth in that family, how could Kåñëa have been seduced, even by 
the gopés? It is concluded, therefore, that it was not possible for Kåñëa to 
do anything abominable. But Mahäräja Parékñit was in doubt as to why 
Kåñëa acted in that way. What was the real purpose? 
Another word Mahäräja Parékñit used when he addressed Çukadeva 
Gosvämé is suvrata, which means to take a vow to enact pious activities. 
Çukadeva Gosvämé was an educated brahmacäré, and under the 
circumstances it was not possible for him to indulge in sex. This is 
strictly prohibited for brahmacärés, and what to speak of a brahmacäré 
like Çukadeva Gosvämé. But because the circumstances of the räsa dance 
were very suspect, Mahäräja Parékñit inquired for clarification from 
Çukadeva Gosvämé. Çukadeva Gosvämé immediately replied that 
transgressions of religious principles by the supreme controller testify to 
His great power. For example, fire can consume any abominable thing; 
that is the manifestation of the supremacy of fire. Similarly, the sun can 
absorb water from a urinal or from stool, and the sun is not polluted; 
rather, due to the influence of the sunshine, the polluted, contaminated 
place becomes disinfected and sterilized. 
One may also argue that since Kåñëa is the supreme authority, His 
activities should be followed. In answer to this argument, Çukadeva 
Gosvämé has very clearly said that the éçvara, or supreme controller, may 
sometimes violate His instructions, but this is possible only for the 
controller Himself, not for the followers. Unusual and uncommon 
activities by the controller can never be imitated. Çukadeva Gosvämé 
warned that the conditioned followers, who are not actually in control, 
should never even imagine imitating the uncommon activities of the 
controller. A Mäyävädé philosopher may falsely claim to be God or 
Kåñëa, but he cannot actually act like Kåñëa. He can persuade his 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
269
followers to falsely imitate the räsa dance, but he is unable to lift 
Govardhana Hill. We have many experiences in the past of Mäyävädé 
rascals’ deluding their followers by posing themselves as Kåñëa in order 
to enjoy räsa-lélä. In many instances they were checked by the 
government, arrested and punished. In Orissa, Öhäkura Bhaktivinoda 
punished a so-called incarnation of Viñëu who was imitating the räsa-
lélä with young girls. There were many complaints against the so-called 
incarnation. At that time Bhaktivinoda Öhäkura was a magistrate, and 
the government deputed him to deal with that rascal, and he punished 
him very severely. The räsa-lélä dance cannot be imitated by anyone. 
Çukadeva Gosvämé warns that one should not even think of imitating it. 
He specifically mentions that if, out of foolishness, one tries to imitate 
Kåñëa’s räsa dance, he will be killed, just like a person who wants to 
imitate Lord Çiva’s drinking of an ocean of poison. Lord Çiva drank an 
ocean of poison and kept it within his throat. The poison made his 
throat turn blue, and therefore Lord Çiva is called Nélakaëöha. But if any 
ordinary person tries to imitate Lord Çiva by drinking poison or smoking 
gaïjä, he is sure to be vanquished and will die within a very short time. 
Lord Çré Kåñëa’s dealings with the gopés occurred under special 
circumstances. 
Most of the gopés in their previous lives were great sages, expert in the 
study of the Vedas, and when Lord Kåñëa appeared as Lord Rämacandra 
they wanted to enjoy with Him. Lord Rämacandra gave them the 
benediction that their desires would be fulfilled when He would appear 
as Kåñëa. Therefore the desire of the gopés to enjoy the appearance of 
Lord Kåñëa was long cherished. So they approached goddess Kätyäyané 
to have Kåñëa as their husband. There are many other circumstances 
which also testify to the supreme authority of Kåñëa and show that He is 
not bound by the rules and regulations of the material world. In special 
cases, He acts as He likes to favor His devotees. This is only possible for 
Him, because He is the supreme controller. People in general should 
follow the instructions of Lord Kåñëa as given in the Bhagavad-gétä and 
should not even imagine imitating Lord Kåñëa in the räsa dance. 
Kåñëa’s lifting of Govardhana Hill and His killing of great demons like 
Pütanä are all obviously extraordinary activities. Similarly, the räsa 
dance is also an uncommon activity and cannot be imitated by any 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
270
ordinary man. An ordinary person engaged in his occupational duty, like 
Arjuna, should execute his duty for the satisfaction of Kåñëa; that is 
within his power. Arjuna was a fighter, and Kåñëa wanted him to fight 
for His satisfaction. Arjuna agreed, although at first he was not willing 
to fight. Duties are required for ordinary persons. They should not jump 
up and try to imitate Kåñëa and indulge in räsa-lélä and thus bring about 
their ruin. One should know with certainty that Kåñëa had no personal 
interest in whatever He did for the benediction of the gopés. As stated in 
the Bhagavad-gétä, na mäà karmäëi limpanti: Kåñëa never enjoys or 
suffers the results of His activities. Therefore it is not possible for Him to 
act irreligiously. He is transcendental to all religious duties and 
principles. He is untouched by the modes of material nature. He is the 
supreme controller of all living entities, either in human society, in the 
demigod society in heavenly planets, or in lower forms of life. He is the 
supreme controller of all living entities and of material nature; 
therefore, He has nothing to do with religious or irreligious principles. 
Çukadeva Gosvämé further concludes that the great sages and devotees, 
who are washed clean of all conditioned life, can move freely even 
within the contamination of material nature by keeping Kåñëa, the 
Supreme Personality of Godhead, within their hearts. In this way they 
also do not become subject to the laws of pleasure and pain in the modes 
of material nature. How, then, is it possible for Kåñëa, who appears by 
His own internal potency, to be subjected to the laws of karma? 
In the Bhagavad-gétä the Lord clearly says that whenever He appears He 
does so by His internal potency; He is not forced to accept a body by the 
laws of karma, like an ordinary living entity. Every other living entity is 
forced to accept a certain type of body by his previous actions. But when 
Kåñëa appears, He always appears in a body that is not forced upon Him 
by the action of His past deeds. His body is a vehicle for His 
transcendental pleasure pastimes, which are enacted by His internal 
potency. He has no obligation to the laws of karma. The Mäyävädé 
monist must accept a certain type of body, being forced by the laws of 
nature; therefore, his claim to being one with Kåñëa, or God, is only 
theoretical. Such persons who claim to be equal with Kåñëa and indulge 
in räsa-lélä create a dangerous situation for the people in general. Kåñëa, 
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, was already present as the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
271
Supersoul within the bodies of the gopés and their husbands. He is the 
guide of all living entities, as is confirmed in the Kaöha Upaniñad: nityo 
nityänäà cetanaç cetanänäm. The Supersoul directs the individual soul 
to act, and the Supersoul is the actor and witness of all action. 
It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gétä that Kåñëa is present in everyone’s 
heart and that from Him come all knowledge, remembrance and 
forgetfulness. He is the original person to be known by Vedic knowledge. 
He is the author of the Vedänta philosophy, and He knows the Vedänta 
philosophy perfectly well. The so-called Vedäntists and Mäyävädés 
cannot understand Kåñëa as He is; they simply mislead their followers by 
imitating the actions of Kåñëa in an unauthorized way. Kåñëa, the 
Supersoul of everyone, is already within the body of everyone; therefore 
if He sees someone or embraces someone there is no question of 
impropriety. 
Some ask that if Kåñëa is self-sufficient, why did He at all manifest the 
pastimes with the gopés, which are disturbing to the so-called moralists of 
the world? The answer is that such activities show special mercy to the 
fallen, conditioned souls. The gopés are expansions of His internal 
energy, but because Kåñëa wanted to exhibit the räsa-lélä, they appeared 
as ordinary human beings. In the material world, pleasure is ultimately 
manifested in the sex attraction between man and woman. The man 
lives simply to be attracted by women, and the woman lives simply to be 
attracted by men. That is the basic principle of material life. As soon as 
these attractions are combined, people become more and more 
implicated in material existence. In order to show them special favor, 
Kåñëa exhibited this räsa-lélä dance. It is just to captivate the 
conditioned soul. Since they are very much attracted by sex, they can 
enjoy the same life with Kåñëa and thus become liberated from the 
material condition. In the Second Canto of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, 
Mahäräja Parékñit also explains that the pastimes and activities of Lord 
Kåñëa are medicine for the conditioned souls. If they simply hear about 
Kåñëa, they become relieved of the material disease. They are addicted 
to material enjoyment and are accustomed to reading sex literature, but 
by hearing these transcendental pastimes of Kåñëa with the gopés, they 
will be relieved of material contamination. 
How they should hear and from whom is also explained by Çukadeva 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
272
Gosvämé. The difficulty is that the whole world is full of Mäyävädés, and 
when they become professional reciters of Çrémad-Bhägavatam, and 
when people, without knowing the effect of the Mäyäväda philosophy, 
hear from such persons, they become confused. Discussion of the räsa-
lélä among people in general is not recommended because they are 
affected by the Mäyäväda philosophy, but if one who is advanced 
explains and people hear from him, certainly the hearers will be 
gradually elevated to the position of Kåñëa consciousness and liberated 
from materially contaminated life. 
Another important point is that none of the gopés who danced with 
Kåñëa were in their material bodies. They danced with Kåñëa in their 
spiritual bodies. All their husbands thought that their wives were 
sleeping by their sides. The so-called husbands of the gopés were already 
enamored with the influence of the external energy of Kåñëa; so by dint 
of this very energy they could not understand that their wives had gone 
to dance with Kåñëa. What then is the basis of accusing Kåñëa of 
dancing with others’ wives? The bodies of the gopés, which were their 
husbands’, were lying in bed, but the spiritual parts and parcels of Kåñëa 
were dancing with Him. Kåñëa is the supreme person, the whole spirit, 
and He danced with the spiritual bodies of the gopés. There is therefore 
no reason to accuse Kåñëa in any way. 
After the räsa dance was over, the night (the night of Brahmä, a very 
long period, as mentioned in the Bhagavad-gétä) turned into the brähma-
muhürta. The brähma-muhürta takes place about one and a half hours 
before sunrise. It is recommended that one should rise from bed at that 
time and, after finishing daily ablutions, take to spiritual activities by 
performing maìgala-ärati and chanting the Hare Kåñëa mantra. This 
period is very convenient for the execution of spiritual activities. When 
that auspicious moment arrived, Kåñëa asked the gopés to leave. 
Although His beloveds were not willing to quit His company, they were 
very obedient to Him. As soon as Kåñëa asked them to go home, they 
immediately left and returned home. Çukadeva Gosvämé concludes this 
episode of the räsa-lélä by pointing out that if a person hears from the 
right source about the pastimes of Kåñëa, who is Viñëu Himself, and the 
gopés, who are expansions of His energy, then he will be relieved of the 
most dangerous type of disease, namely lust. In other words, one who 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
273
actually hears the räsa-lélä will become completely freed from the lusty 
desire of sex life and elevated to the highest level of spiritual 
understanding. Generally, because they hear the räsa-lélä from 
Mäyävädés and they themselves are Mäyävädés, people become more and 
more implicated in sex life. The conditioned soul should hear the räsa-
lélä dance from an authorized spiritual master and be trained by him so 
that he can understand the whole situation; thus one can be elevated to 
the highest standard of spiritual life; otherwise one will be implicated. 
Material lust is a kind of heart disease, and to cure the material heart 
disease of the conditioned soul, it is recommended that one should hear, 
but not from the impersonalist rascals. If one hears from the right 
sources with right understanding, then his situation will be different. 
Çukadeva Gosvämé has used the word çraddhänvita for one who is 
trained in spiritual life. Çraddhä, or faith, is the beginning. One who has 
developed his faith in Kåñëa as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the 
Supreme Spirit Soul, can both describe and hear the räsa-lélä. Çukadeva 
also uses the word anuçåëuyät. One must hear from the disciplic 
succession. Anu means “following,” and anu also means “always.” So one 
must always follow the disciplic succession and not hear from any stray 
professional reciter, whether a Mäyävädé or an ordinary man. 
Anuçåëuyät means that one must hear from an authorized person who is 
in the disciplic succession and is always engaged in Kåñëa consciousness. 
When a person hears the räsa-lélä in this way, the effect will be sure: he 
will be elevated to the highest position of spiritual life. 
Çukadeva Gosvämé uses two specific words, bhaktim and paräm. Bhaktià 
paräm means execution of devotional service above the neophyte stage. 
Those who are simply attracted to temple worship but do not know the 
philosophy of bhakti are in the neophyte stage. That sort of bhakti is not 
the perfectional stage. The perfectional stage of bhakti, or devotional 
service, is completely free from material contamination. The most 
dangerous aspect of contamination is lust, or sex life. Bhaktià paräm 
devotional service is so potent that the more one advances in this line, 
the more he loses his attraction for material life. One who is actually 
deriving benefit from hearing the räsa-lélä dance surely achieves the 
transcendental position. He surely loses all traces of lust in his heart. 
Çréla Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura points out that according to the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
274
Bhagavad-gétä, Brahmä’s day and Brahmä’s night are periods of solar 
years expanding to 4,300,000 multiplied by 1,000. According to 
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura, the räsa dance was performed during 
the long period of Brahmä’s night, but the gopés could not understand 
that. In order to fulfill their desire, Kåñëa extended the night to cover 
such a great period of time. One may ask how this was possible, and 
Viçvanätha Cakravarté Öhäkura reminds us that Kåñëa, although bound 
by a small rope, could show His mother the whole universe within His 
mouth. How was this possible? The answer is that He can do anything 
for the pleasure of His devotees. Similarly, because the gopés wanted to 
enjoy Kåñëa, they were given the opportunity to associate with Him for 
a long period. This was done according to His promise. When Kåñëa 
stole the garments of the gopés while they were taking a bath at 
Céraghäöa on the Yamunä, Kåñëa promised to fulfill their desire in some 
future night. In one night, therefore, they enjoyed the company of 
Kåñëa as their beloved husband, but that night was not an ordinary 
night. It was a night of Brahmä, and lasted millions and millions of years. 
Everything is possible for Kåñëa, for He is the supreme controller. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-third Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“Description of the Räsa Dance.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
275
CHAPTER THIRTY-FOUR 
Vidyädhara Liberated and the 
Demon Çaìkhacüòa Killed 
 
Once upon a time, the cowherd men of Våndävana, headed by Nanda 
Mahäräja, desired to go to Ambikävana to observe the Çiva-rätri 
ceremony. The räsa-lélä was performed during the autumn, and after 
that the next big ceremony is Holi, or the Doläyäträ ceremony. Between 
the Doläyäträ ceremony and the räsa-lélä ceremony there is one 
important ceremony called Çiva-rätri, which is especially observed by 
the Çaivites, or devotees of Lord Çiva. Sometimes the Vaiñëavas also 
observe this ceremony because they accept Lord Çiva as the foremost 
Vaiñëava. But the function of Çiva-rätri is not observed very regularly by 
the bhaktas, or devotees of Kåñëa. Under the circumstances, it is stated 
in Çrémad-Bhägavatam that Nanda Mahäräja and the other cowherd 
men “once upon a time desired.” This means that they were not 
regularly observing the Çiva-rätri function but that once upon a time 
they wanted to go to Ambikävana out of curiosity. Ambikävana is 
somewhere in the Gujarat province, and it is said to be situated on the 
river Sarasvaté. Yet we do not find any Sarasvaté River in the Gujarat 
province, although there is a river named Savarmaté. In India, all the big 
places of pilgrimage are situated on nice rivers like the Ganges, Yamunä, 
Sarasvaté, Narmadä, Godävaré and Käveré. Ambikävana was situated on 
the bank of Sarasvaté, and Nanda Mahäräja and all the other cowherd 
men went there. 
They very devotedly began to worship the deity of Lord Çiva and 
Ambikä. It is the general practice that wherever there is a temple of 
Lord Çiva, there must be another temple, of Ambikä (or Durgä), because 
Ambikä is the wife of Lord Çiva and is the most exalted of chaste 
women. She doesn’t live outside the association of her husband. After 
reaching Ambikävana, the cowherd men of Våndävana first bathed 
themselves in the river Sarasvaté. If one goes to any place of pilgrimage, 
his first duty is to take a bath and sometimes to shave his head. That is 
the first business. After taking a bath, they worshiped the deities and 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
276
then distributed charity in the holy places. 
According to the Vedic system, charity is given to the brähmaëas. It is 
stated in the Vedic çästras that only the brähmaëas and the sannyäsés 
can accept charity. The cowherd men from Våndävana gave the 
brähmaëas cows decorated with golden ornaments and beautiful 
garlands. The brähmaëas are given charity because they are not engaged 
in any business profession. They are supposed to be engaged in 
brahminical occupations, as described in the Bhagavad-gétä—namely, 
they must be very learned and must perform austerity and penances. Not 
only must they themselves be learned, but they must also teach others. 
Brähmaëas are not meant to be brähmaëas alone: they should create 
other brähmaëas also. If a man is found who agrees to become a 
brähmaëa’s disciple, he is also given the chance to become a brähmaëa. 
The brähmaëa is always engaged in the worship of Lord Viñëu. 
Therefore the brähmaëas are eligible to accept all kinds of charity. But if 
the brähmaëas receive excess charity, they are to distribute it for the 
service of Viñëu. In the Vedic scriptures, therefore, one is recommended 
to give charity to the brähmaëas, and by so doing one pleases Lord Viñëu 
and all the demigods. 
The pilgrims take a bath, worship the deity and give charity; they are 
also recommended to fast one day. They should go to a place of 
pilgrimage and stay there at least for three days. The first day is spent 
fasting, and at night they can drink a little water because water does not 
break the fast. 
The cowherd men, headed by Nanda Mahäräja, spent that night on the 
bank of the Sarasvaté. They fasted all day and drank a little water at 
night. But while they were taking rest, a great serpent from the nearby 
forest appeared before them and hungrily began to swallow up Nanda 
Mahäräja. Nanda cried out helplessly, “My dear son, Kåñëa, please come 
and save me from this danger! This serpent is swallowing me!” When 
Nanda Mahäräja cried for help, all the cowherd men got up and saw 
what was happening. They immediately took up burning logs and began 
to beat the snake to kill it. But in spite of being beaten with burning 
logs, the serpent was not about to give up swallowing Nanda Mahäräja. 
At that time Kåñëa appeared on the scene and touched the serpent with 
His lotus feet. Immediately upon being touched by the lotus feet of 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
277
Kåñëa, the serpent shed its reptilian body and appeared as a very 
beautiful demigod named Vidyädhara. His bodily features were so 
beautiful that he appeared to be worshipable. There was a luster and 
effulgence emanating from his body, and he was garlanded with a gold 
necklace. He offered obeisances to Lord Kåñëa and stood before Him 
with great humility. Kåñëa then asked the demigod, “You appear to be a 
very nice demigod and to be favored by the goddess of fortune. How is it 
that you performed such abominable activities that you got the body of a 
serpent?” The demigod then began to narrate the story of his previous 
life. 
“My dear Lord,” he said, “in my previous life I was named Vidyädhara 
and was known all over the world for my beauty. Because I was a 
celebrated personality, I used to travel all over in my airplane. While 
traveling, I saw a great sage named Aìgirä. He was very ugly, and 
because I was very proud of my beauty, I laughed at him. Due to this 
sinful action, I was condemned by the great sage to assume the form of a 
serpent.” 
One should note here that before being favored by Kåñëa a person is 
always under the modes of material nature, however elevated he may be 
materially. Vidyädhara was a materially elevated demigod, and he was 
very beautiful. He also held a great material position and was able to 
travel all over by airplane. Yet he was condemned to become a serpent 
in his next life. Any materially elevated person can be condemned to an 
abominable species of life if he is not careful. It is a misconception that 
after reaching the human body one is never degraded. Vidyädhara 
himself stated that even though he was a demigod he was condemned to 
become a serpent. But because he was touched by the lotus feet of Kåñëa, 
he immediately came to Kåñëa consciousness. He admitted, however, 
that in his previous life he was actually sinful. A Kåñëa conscious person 
knows that he is always the servant of the servant of Kåñëa; he is most 
insignificant, and whatever good he does is by the grace of Kåñëa and 
the spiritual master. 
The demigod Vidyädhara continued to speak to Çré Kåñëa. “Because I 
was very proud of the exquisite beauty of my body,” he said, “I derided 
the ugly features of the great sage Aìgirä. He cursed me for my sin, and I 
became a snake. Now I consider that this curse by the sage was not at all 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
278
a curse; it was a great benediction for me. Had he not cursed me, I would 
not have assumed the body of a serpent and would not have been kicked 
by Your lotus feet and thus freed from all material contamination.” 
In material existence, four things are very valuable: to be born in a 
decent family, to be very rich, to be very learned and to be very 
beautiful. These are considered to be material assets. Unfortunately, 
without Kåñëa consciousness, these material assets sometimes become 
sources of sin and degradation. Despite Vidyädhara’s being a demigod 
and having a beautiful body, he was condemned to the body of a snake 
due to pride. Therefore from this incident we can learn that those who 
are too proud of their material assets or who are inimical toward others 
are degraded to the bodies of snakes. A snake is considered to be the 
most cruel and envious living entity, but those who are human beings 
and are envious of others are considered to be even more vicious than 
snakes. The snake can be charmed or controlled by mantras and herbs, 
but a person who is envious cannot be controlled by anyone. 
“My dear Lord,” Vidyädhara continued, “now, since I think I have 
become freed from all kinds of sinful activities, I am asking Your 
permission to return to my abode, the heavenly planets.” This request 
indicates that persons who are attached to fruitive activities, desiring 
promotion to the comforts of higher planetary systems, cannot achieve 
their ultimate goal of life without the sanction of the Supreme 
Personality of Godhead. It is also stated in the Bhagavad-gétä that the 
less intelligent want to achieve material benefits and therefore worship 
different kinds of demigods, but they actually get the benedictions from 
the demigods through the permission of Lord Viñëu, or Kåñëa. Demigods 
have no power to bestow material profit. Even if one is attached to 
material benedictions, he can worship Kåñëa, the Supreme Personality of 
Godhead, and ask Him. Kåñëa is completely able to give even material 
benedictions. There is a difference, however, between asking material 
benedictions from the demigods and asking them from Kåñëa. Dhruva 
Mahäräja worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead for a material 
benediction, but when he actually achieved the favor of the Supreme 
Lord and saw Him, he was so satisfied that he refused to accept any 
material benediction. The intelligent person does not worship the 
demigods or ask favors from them; he directly becomes Kåñëa conscious, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
279
and if he has any desire for material benefit, he asks Kåñëa, not the 
demigods. 
Vidyädhara, awaiting Kåñëa’s permission to return to the heavenly 
planets, said, “Now, because I am touched by Your lotus feet, I am 
relieved of all kinds of material pangs. You are the most powerful of all 
mystics. You are the original Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are 
the master of all devotees. You are the proprietor of all planetary 
systems, and therefore I am asking Your permission. You may accept me 
as fully surrendered unto You. I know very well that persons who are 
constantly engaged in chanting Your holy name attain release from all 
sinful reactions, and certainly persons who are fortunate enough to be 
personally touched by Your lotus feet are freed. Therefore I am sure that 
I am now relieved of the curse of the brähmaëa simply by seeing You and 
being touched by Your lotus feet.” 
In this way, Vidyädhara got permission from Lord Kåñëa to return to his 
home in the higher planetary system. After receiving this permission, he 
circumambulated the Lord and offered his respectful obeisances unto 
Him, and then he returned to his heavenly planet. Thus Nanda 
Mahäräja became relieved of the imminent danger of being devoured by 
the snake. 
The cowherd men, who had come to execute the ritualistic function of 
worshiping Lord Çiva and Ambikä, finished their business and prepared 
to return to Våndävana. While returning, they recalled the wonderful 
activities of Kåñëa. By relating the incident of Vidyädhara’s deliverance, 
they became more attached to Kåñëa. They had come to worship Lord 
Çiva and Ambikä, but the result was that they became more and more 
attached to Kåñëa. Similarly, the gopés worshiped goddess Kätyäyané to 
become more and more attached to Kåñëa. It is stated in the Bhagavad-
gétä that persons who are attached to worshiping demigods like Lord 
Brahmä, Çiva, Indra and Candra for some personal benefit are less 
intelligent and have forgotten the real purpose of life. But the cowherd 
men, inhabitants of Våndävana, were no ordinary men. Whatever they 
did, they did for Kåñëa. If one worships demigods like Lord Çiva and 
Lord Brahmä to become more attached to Kåñëa, that is approved. But if 
one goes to the demigods for some personal benefit, that is condemned. 
After this incident, on a very pleasant night Kåñëa and His elder brother 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
280
Balaräma, who are inconceivably powerful, went into the forest of 
Våndävana. They were accompanied by the damsels of Vrajabhümi, and 
They began to enjoy their company. The young damsels of Vraja were 
very nicely dressed and anointed with pulp of sandalwood and decorated 
with flowers. The moon was shining in the sky, surrounded by glittering 
stars. The breeze was blowing, bearing the aroma of mallikä flowers, and 
the bumblebees were mad after the aroma. Taking advantage of the 
pleasing atmosphere, Kåñëa and Balaräma began to sing very 
melodiously. The damsels became so absorbed in Their rhythmical song 
that they almost forgot themselves; their hair loosened, their dresses 
slackened, and their garlands began to fall to the ground. 
At that time, while Kåñëa, Balaräma and the damsels were so much 
absorbed, almost in madness, a demoniac associate of Kuvera (the 
treasurer of the heavenly planets) appeared on the scene. The demon’s 
name was Çaìkhacüòa because on his head there was a valuable jewel 
resembling a conchshell. Just as the two sons of Kuvera had been puffed 
up over their wealth and opulence and did not care for Närada Muni’s 
presence, this Çaìkhacüòa was also puffed up over material opulence. He 
thought that Kåñëa and Balaräma were two ordinary cowherd boys 
enjoying the company of many beautiful girls. Generally, in the material 
world, a person with riches thinks that all beautiful women should be 
enjoyed by him. Çaìkhacüòa also thought that since he belonged to the 
rich community of Kuvera, he, not Kåñëa and Balaräma, should enjoy 
the company of so many beautiful girls. He therefore decided to take 
charge of them. He appeared before Kåñëa, Balaräma and the damsels of 
Vraja and began to lead the girls away to the north. He commanded 
them as if he were their proprietor and husband, despite the presence of 
Kåñëa and Balaräma. Being forcibly taken away by Çaìkhacüòa, the 
damsels of Vraja called out the names of Kåñëa and Balaräma for 
protection. The two brothers immediately began to follow them, taking 
up big logs of çäla wood in Their hands. “Don’t be afraid, don’t be 
afraid,” They called to the gopés. “We are coming at once to chastise this 
demon.” Very quickly They reached Çaìkhacüòa. Thinking the brothers 
too powerful, Çaìkhacüòa left the company of the gopés and ran in fear 
of his life. But Kåñëa would not let him go. He entrusted the gopés to the 
care of Balaräma and followed Çaìkhacüòa wherever he fled. Kåñëa 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
281
wanted to take the valuable jewel resembling a conchshell from the head 
of the demon. After following him a very short distance, Kåñëa caught 
him, struck his head with His fist and killed him. He then took the 
valuable jewel and returned. In the presence of all the damsels of Vraja, 
He presented the valuable jewel to His elder brother, Balaräma. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-fourth Chapter of 
Kåñëa, “Vidyädhara Liberated and the Demon Çaìkhacüòa Killed.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
282
CHAPTER THIRTY-FIVE 
The Gopés’ Feelings of Separation 
 
The gopés of Våndävana were so attached to Kåñëa that they were not 
satisfied simply with the räsa dance at night. They wanted to associate 
with Him and enjoy His company during the daytime also. When Kåñëa 
went to the forest with His cowherd boyfriends and cows, the gopés did 
not physically take part, but their hearts went with Him. And because 
their hearts went, they were able to enjoy His company through strong 
feelings of separation. To acquire this strong feeling of separation is the 
teaching of Lord Caitanya and His direct disciplic succession of 
Gosvämés. When we are not in physical contact with Kåñëa, we can 
associate with Him like the gopés, through feelings of separation. Kåñëa’s 
transcendental form, qualities, pastimes and entourage are all identical 
with Him. There are nine different kinds of devotional service. 
Devotional service to Kåñëa in feelings of separation elevates the 
devotee to the highest perfectional level, to the level of the gopés. 
It is stated in Çréniväsäcärya’s prayer to the six Gosvämés that they left 
the material opulences of government service and the princely status of 
life and went to Våndävana, where they lived just like ordinary 
mendicants, begging from door to door. But they were so much enriched 
with the gopés’ feelings of separation that they enjoyed transcendental 
pleasure at every moment. Similarly, when Lord Caitanya was at 
Jagannätha Puré, He was in the role of Rädhäräëé, feeling separation 
from Kåñëa. Those who are in the disciplic succession of the Mädhva-
Gauòéya-sampradäya should always feel separation from Kåñëa, worship 
His transcendental form and discuss His transcendental teachings, His 
pastimes, His qualities and His entourage. That will enrich the devotees 
to the highest devotional perfection. Feeling constant separation while 
engaged in the service of the Lord is the perfection of Kåñëa 
consciousness. 
The gopés used to discuss Kåñëa amongst themselves, and their talks were 
as follows. “My dear friends,” one gopé said, “do you know that when 
Kåñëa lies on the ground He rests on His left elbow, and His head rests 
on His left hand? He moves His attractive eyebrows while playing His 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
283
flute with His delicate fingers, and the sound He produces creates such a 
nice atmosphere that the denizens of the heavenly planets, who travel in 
space with their wives and beloveds, stop their airplanes, for they are 
stunned by the vibration of the flute. The wives of the demigods who are 
seated in the planes then become very much ashamed of their singing 
and musical qualifications. Not only that, but they become afflicted with 
conjugal love, and their hair and tight clothes immediately loosen.” 
Another gopé said, “My dear friends, Kåñëa is so beautiful that the 
goddess of fortune always remains on His chest, and He is always 
adorned with a golden necklace. Beautiful Kåñëa plays His flute in order 
to enliven the hearts of many devotees. He is the only friend of the 
suffering living entities. When He plays His flute, all the cows and other 
animals of Våndävana, although engaged in eating, simply take a morsel 
of food in their mouths and stop chewing. Their ears raise up and they 
become stunned. They do not appear alive but like painted animals. 
Kåñëa’s flute-playing is so attractive that even the animals become 
enchanted, and what to speak of ourselves.” 
Another gopé said, “My dear friends, not only living animals but even 
inanimate objects like the rivers and lakes of Våndävana also become 
stunned when Kåñëa passes with peacock feathers on His head and His 
body smeared with the minerals of Våndävana. With leaves and flowers 
decorating His body, He looks like some hero. When He plays on His 
flute and calls the cows with Balaräma, the river Yamunä stops flowing 
and waits for the air to carry dust from His lotus feet. The river Yamunä 
is unfortunate like us; it does not get Kåñëa’s mercy. The river simply 
remains stunned, stopping its waves, just as we also stop crying for Kåñëa 
in expectation.” 
In the absence of Kåñëa the gopés were constantly shedding tears, but 
sometimes, when they expected that Kåñëa was coming, they would stop 
crying. But when they saw that Kåñëa was not coming, then again they 
would become frustrated and begin to cry. Kåñëa is the original 
Personality of Godhead, the origin of all Viñëu forms, and the cowherd 
boys are all demigods. Lord Viñëu is always worshiped and surrounded by 
different demigods like Lord Çiva, Lord Brahmä, Indra, Candra and 
others. When Kåñëa traveled through the Våndävana forest or walked 
on the Govardhana Hill, He was accompanied by the cowherd boys. 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
284
While walking, He played His flute just to call His cows. Just by His 
association, the trees, plants and other vegetation in the forest 
immediately became Kåñëa conscious. A Kåñëa conscious person 
sacrifices everything for Kåñëa. Although the trees and plants were not 
very advanced in consciousness, by the association of Kåñëa and His 
friends they also became Kåñëa conscious. They then wanted to deliver 
everything—whatever they had—namely their fruits, flowers and the 
honey incessantly falling from their branches. 
When Kåñëa walked on the bank of the Yamunä, He was seen nicely 
decorated with tilaka on His face. He was garlanded with different kinds 
of forest flowers, and His body was smeared with the pulp of sandalwood 
and tulasé leaves. The bumblebees became mad after the fragrance and 
sweetness of the atmosphere. Being pleased by the humming sound of 
the bees, Kåñëa would play His flute, and together the sounds became so 
sweet to hear that aquatic birds like cranes, swans and ducks were 
charmed. Instead of swimming or flying, they became stunned. They 
closed their eyes and entered a trance of meditation in worship of Kåñëa. 
One gopé said, “My dear friends, Kåñëa and Balaräma are nicely dressed 
with earrings and pearl necklaces. They enjoy Themselves on the top of 
Govardhana Hill, and everything becomes absorbed in transcendental 
pleasure when Kåñëa plays on His flute, charming the whole created 
manifestation. When He plays, the clouds stop their loud thundering out 
of fear of Him. Rather than disturb the vibration of His flute, they 
respond with mild thunder and so congratulate Kåñëa, their friend.” 
Kåñëa is accepted as the friend of the cloud because both the cloud and 
Kåñëa satisfy the people when they are disturbed. When the people are 
burning due to excessive heat, the cloud satisfies them with rain. 
Similarly, when people in materialistic life become disturbed by the 
blazing fire of material pangs, Kåñëa consciousness gives them relief like 
a cloud. The cloud and Kåñëa, having the same bodily color also, are 
considered to be friends. Desiring to congratulate its superior friend, the 
cloud poured not water but small flowers and covered the head of Kåñëa 
just like an umbrella to protect Him from the scorching sunshine. 
One of the gopés told mother Yaçodä, “My dear mother, your son is very 
expert among the cowherd boys. He knows all the different arts of how 
to tend the cows and how to play the flute. He composes His own songs, 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
285
and to play them He puts His flute to His mouth. When He plays, either 
in the morning or in the evening, all the demigods, including Lord Çiva, 
Brahmä, Indra and Candra, bow their heads and listen with great 
attention. Although they are very learned and expert, they cannot 
understand the musical arrangements of Kåñëa’s flute. They simply 
listen attentively and try to understand, but they become bewildered 
and nothing more.” 
Another gopé said, “My dear friends, when Kåñëa returns home with His 
cows, the footprints of the soles of His feet—with flag, thunderbolt, 
trident and lotus flower—relieve the pain the earth feels when the cows 
traverse it. He walks in a stride which is so attractive, and He carries His 
flute. Just by looking at Him we become lusty to enjoy His company. At 
that time, our movements cease. We become just like trees and stand 
perfectly still, unaware that our hair and clothes are loosening.” 
Kåñëa had many thousands of cows, and they were divided into groups 
according to their colors. They were also differently named according to 
color. When He would prepare to return from the pasturing ground, He 
would gather all the cows. As Vaiñëavas count 108 beads, which 
represent the 108 individual gopés, so Kåñëa would also count on 108 
beads to count the different groups of cows. 
“When Kåñëa returns, He is garlanded with tulasé leaves,” a gopé 
described Him to a friend. “He puts His hand on the shoulder of a 
cowherd boyfriend and begins to blow His transcendental flute. The 
wives of the black deer become enchanted upon hearing the vibration of 
His flute, which resembles the vibration of the véëä. The deer come to 
Kåñëa and become so charmed that they stand still, forgetting their 
homes and husbands. Like us, who are enchanted by the ocean of the 
transcendental qualities of Kåñëa, the she-deer become enchanted by the 
vibration of His flute.” 
Another gopé told mother Yaçodä, “My dear mother, when your son 
returns home, He decorates Himself with the buds of the kunda flower, 
and just to enlighten and gladden His friends, He blows His flute. The 
breeze blowing from the south creates a pleasing atmosphere because it is 
fragrant and very cool. Minor demigods like the Gandharvas and 
Siddhas take advantage of this atmosphere and offer prayers to your son 
by sounding their bugles and drums. Kåñëa is very kind to the 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
286
inhabitants of Vrajabhümi, Våndävana, and when He returns with His 
cows and friends, He is remembered as the lifter of Govardhana Hill. 
Taking advantage of this opportunity, the most exalted demigods like 
Lord Brahmä and Lord Çiva come down to offer their evening prayers, 
and they accompany the cowherd boys in glorifying the qualities of 
Kåñëa. 
“Kåñëa is compared to the moon, born in the ocean of the womb of 
Devaké. When He returns in the evening, it appears that He is fatigued, 
but He still tries to gladden the inhabitants of Våndävana by His 
auspicious presence. When Kåñëa returns, garlanded with flowers, His 
face looks beautiful, adorned with golden earrings. He walks into 
Våndävana with a stride just like the elephant’s and slowly enters His 
home. Upon His return, the men, women and cows of Våndävana 
immediately forget the scorching heat of the day.” 
Such descriptions of Kåñëa’s transcendental pastimes and activities were 
remembered by the gopés during His absence from Våndävana. They give 
us some idea of how attractive Kåñëa is, not only to human beings but to 
all animate and inanimate objects. In Våndävana, the trees, the plants, 
the water, animals like the deer and cows—everybody and everything is 
attracted to Kåñëa. That is the perfect description of Kåñëa’s attraction. 
The example of the gopés is very instructive to persons who are trying to 
be absorbed in Kåñëa consciousness. One can very easily associate with 
Kåñëa simply by remembering His transcendental pastimes. Everyone 
has a tendency to love someone. That Kåñëa should be the object of love 
is the central point of Kåñëa consciousness. By constantly chanting the 
Hare Kåñëa mantra and remembering the transcendental pastimes of 
Kåñëa, one can be fully in Kåñëa consciousness and thus make his life 
sublime and fruitful. 
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-fifth Chapter of Kåñëa, 
“The Gopés’ Feelings of Separation.” 
Copyright © 1998 The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Int'l. All Rights Reserved. 
287
Krsna, The Supreme Personality of Godhead 
Volume I 
 
 e-book 
 
 
This e-book and others are available for download at: 
 
http://www.e-vedas.com 
 
Hard bound books may be purchased at: 
 
http://www.thekrishnastore.com 
 
Email comments or questions to: 
 
comments@e-vedas.com 
 
 
This e-book was completed on February 4, 2003 
