Dedicated to my beloved sister Lila, whose encouragement has inspired me
to write about the gods.
 
 
 
Aum Ganeshaya Namaha!
I  bow to Lord Ganesha.
May he remove all obstacles and
grant the highest spiritual perfection
Aum Sri Krishnaya Parabrahmane Namaha!
 
 
 
Aum Sri Tulasidhamabhushanaya Namaha!
Adorations unto thee,
O Vanamali!
At thy lotus feet is offered,
This immortal garland of
U nfading blossoms,
Depicting Thy divine lilas!
Aum Sri Krishna Dwaipayanaya Namaha!
Namosthuthe Vyasa vishala buddhe,
Phullaravindayatapatra netra,
Yena twaya Bharatha taila poorna,
Prajvalitho jnanamaya pradeepa
Salutations unto thee O Vyasa! Of keen intellect, whose eyes are like the
petals of a full-blown lotus, by whom was lit the lamp of wisdom ﬁlled with
the oil of the Mahabharata.
Humble prostrations to Sri Krishna Dwaipayana Vyasa from whose
nectarous writings in the Srimad Bhagavata Purana and the Mahabharata
the salient features of the lilas of the Lord Krishna have been gathered.
Aum Sri Shukabrahmarishe Namaha!
Yam pravrajanthainanupethamapethakrityam,
Dwaipayano virahakathara ajuhava,
Putrethi tanmayathaya taravobhinedu,
Stavam sarvabhuthahridayam munimanathosmi.
Salutations to Sri Shuka, who wandered forth all alone, renouncing home
and relations, from the time of his birth. He was fully enlightened, and he
answered the heartrending calls of his father, Vyasa, who had followed him,
through the mouths of the trees. Due to his realization of the Vedantic truth
of nonduality, he was one with the soul of all things!
Grateful prostrations unto thee O son of Vyasa, Sri Shuka Brahmarishi, the
eternally enlightened boy sage, from whose immortal words as narrated in
the Srimad Bhagavatam the stories of the early life of the Lord’s lilas have
been gained.
Aum Nirvanaya Namaha!
Prostrations to all the sages and saints through whose grace this humble
suta has been emboldened to undertake the stupendous task of narrating the
lilas of the greatest incarnation—the Poorna Avatar!
Aum Gopathaye Namaha!
Prostrations unto thee O Mother, Bharathavarsha! The Holy Land,
birthplace of countless sages, in whose immaculate womb the Lord was
born and on whose bosom he acted his cosmic drama, and on whose earth
the footprints of his lotus feet are still imprinted!
Aum Vande Mataram!
Vanamali, Gadi, Sarngi,
Shanki, Chakri cha Nandaki,
Sriman Narayano Vishnu,
Vaasudevobhi rakshathu!
May Lord Narayana or Vishnu who took on the auspicious form of
Vaasudeva, adorned with the garland of wildﬂowers, grant me protection
from all sides with his divine accoutrements like the mace, the conch, the
discus, the bow Sarnga, and the sword Nandaka.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
 
Aum Sri Gurave Namaha!
Benediction
His holiness, J agadguru, Sri J ayendra Saraswathi Sri Pada, the sixty-ninth
and reigning Shankaracharya of Sri Kanchi Kamakoti Peetham.
I offer my humble prostrations at the lotus feet of my beloved Gurudeva
who has blessed me in all ways.
I bow to that guru who is Brahma, Vishnu, Maheswara, as well as the
Supreme Transcendental Brahman.
I bow to that guru who has removed the blindness of ignorance by applying
the collyrium of wisdom!
The focus of meditation is the form of the guru. The objects of worship are
the feet of the guru. The mantra is the holy word given by the guru. And
liberation is due to the grace of the guru alone.
I meditate on the form of my most illumined guru Sri J ayendra Saraswathi,
the glorious successor in the line of the brilliant Sri Shankaracharya, who
was the cause for removing the ignorance of the world.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
C ontents
Title Page
Dedication
Foreword by Swami Krishnananda
Preface: The Historical Krishna
Introduction: Krishna the Supreme Incarnation
Part 1: Bala-Lila—The Play of the Child
Chapter 1: The Advent
Chapter 2: The Birth of the Unborn
Chapter 3: The Divine Infant
Chapter 4: The Butter Thief
Chapter 5: Bondage of the Boundless
Chapter 6: Brahma Bemused
Chapter 7: The Enchanting Flute
Chapter 8: Krishna Lifts the Mountain
Chapter 9: The Divine Lover
Chapter 10: The Lord of Vraja
Part 2: Raja-Lila—The Royal Game
Chapter 11: The Prophecy Fulﬁlled
Chapter 12: Uddhava at Gokula
Chapter 13: Lord of Dwaraka
Chapter 14: Abduction of Rukmini
Chapter 15: The Cursed Gem
Chapter 16: The Pandavas
Chapter 17: The Divine Husband
Chapter 18: The Sons of Krishna
Chapter 19: The Divine Ruler
Chapter 20: The Rajasuya Sacriﬁce
Part 3: Uttama-Lila—The Game Supreme
Chapter 21: The Gambling Match
Chapter 22: The Exile
Chapter 23: The Lord as Ambassador
Chapter 24: Declaration of War
Chapter 25: Srimad Bhagavad Gita
Chapter 26: The Mahabharata War
Chapter 27: The End of the War
Chapter 28: The Advice of Bhishma
Chapter 29: The Story of Sudama
Chapter 30: Dharma Rules Supreme
Chapter 31: The Curse of the Sages
Chapter 32: Advice to Uddhava
Chapter 33: The Death of the Deathless
Epilogue: Lila—The Cosmic Play
Appendix One. Alphabetical List of Mantras
Appendix Two. List of Characters
Glossary of Sanskrit Terms
About the Author
About Inner Traditions •  Bear &  Company
Books of Related Interest
Copyright &  Permissions
Aum Sri Anandaya Namaha!
F oreword
It pleases me immensely to know that Devi Vanamali, the author of this
admirable book on the life of Bhagavan (Lord) Sri Krishna, wants me to
write a few words by way of an introductory appreciation and suggestion. I
have gone through this book carefully, and my ﬁrst impression after reading
it was that this is the ﬁrst attempt perhaps ever made by a scholar-devotee to
present in one compact volume the multifaceted and majestic life of the
Great Incarnation. What charmed me especially was the perspicacious and
deeply touching style and expression in which the whole story is told so
beautifully and so comprehensively.
Usually devotees of Lord Sri Krishna conﬁne their attention to the
childhood and boyhood days of Krishna in Gokula, Vrindavana, and
Mathura, and even if these accounts are a little more extended, the writings
generally add only the events in Dwaraka, of Sri Krishna’s regime and his
social greatness as delineated in the Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana.
Very few pay sufﬁcient attention to the wonderful deeds of the towering
Krishna of the Mahabharata, without which facet his great life story would
remain incomplete. It is delightful to observe that Mata Devi Vanamali has
not omitted any salient feature and has managed to press into her book the
essentials of the story as we have it in both the Srimad Bhagavatam and the
Mahabharata.
The divine play of the child in Vrindavana, the serious posture of a
mature potentate in Dwaraka, and the transcendent power exhibited in the
Mahabharata constitute the three sections in the book of Sri Krishna’s life.
The author of this book is not merely a devotee in the ordinary sense of the
term, but one who has endeavored to saturate her very life with Krishna
bhakti, due to which specialty in her the work glows with a fervor of spirit
and a radiance of clarity in presentation. A book written by a seeker who
veritably lives in the presence of the Lord will no doubt exert a magnetic
inﬂuence on every reader of this divine saga, this chronicle of God come
fully in visible form.
A reading of the life of Sri Krishna will not only be a rewarding treat, as
an enchanting vision of the deeds of the Divine Superman, but also charge
the reader’s personality with an energy and vigor not to be had on this
Earth.
May works of this kind see the light of day in more and more numbers,
for the blessing of all humankind.
SWAMI KRISHNANANDA
GENERAL SECRETARY
DIVINE LIFE SOCIETY
RISHIKESH, INDIA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
PRE F AC E
T he H istorical Krishna
The sea, which had been beating against the shores, suddenly broke
the boundary that was imposed on it by nature. The sea rushed into
the city. I t coursed through the streets of the beautiful city. The sea
covered up everything in the city. Arjuna saw the beautiful buildings
becoming submerged one by one. He took a last look at the mansion
of Krishna. I n a matter of a few moments it was all over. The sea
had now become as placid as a lake. There was no trace of the
beautiful city, which had been the favorite haunt of all the
Pandavas. Dwaraka was just a name;  just a memory.
“MAUSALA PARVA,” MAHABHARATA
Hinduism is not a historical religion. If somebody were to prove
conclusively that Krishna, Rama, and the various gods of the Hindu
pantheon never existed, most Hindus would not mind in the least, and the
religion would continue to ﬂourish as it has done for so many centuries.
However, to the devotees of Krishna, he is as real as any of their friends or
relatives or children, depending on how they regard him—as friend,
relation, child, or lover. This being so, most Indians have not bothered to
verify his existence. This may seem strange since there have been countless
devotees of his who have heard the haunting melody of his ﬂute calling to
them across the centuries and even seen glimpses of his tantalizing form.
But there is a failing in the Indian mentality, which considers historicity to
be of least importance. What is more important to us is the impact that such
a being has had on us. Krishna has shaped the trend of our culture, our art,
music, and sculpture over the centuries, and this is enough for us. The very
fact that the stories of Krishna have stood the challenge of centuries should
have proved to us that such a personality did indeed exist in solid ﬂesh and
blood at the time given in our scriptures. The modern mind has a scientiﬁc
bent, and our generation should have tried to pull aside the veil of the
centuries and found out the truth about our favorite god.
But unfortunately, the modern educated youth of our country have been
fed a pack of lies through our history books, which were written by Western
orientalists with vested interests. Our youth have been brainwashed into
believing that our scriptures are all ﬁlled with absurdities and at best can
only be typed as myth or fantasy. However, the fact is that our Puranas are
true records of our glorious past. When the English ﬁrst came to India, they
were shocked to ﬁnd that, if the dates given in our Puranas were true, Indian
civilization predated theirs by thousands of years. They refused to accept
the fact that a glorious civilization ﬂourished in India at a time when Europe
was ﬁlled with barbarians clothed in skins, ﬂourishing crude weapons. Thus
they labeled as myth all historical evidences in the Hindu scriptures,
especially in the Puranas.
Brainwashed by the views of the Western historians, we have forgotten to
look at our scriptures with an unprejudiced gaze. If we did so, we would
realize that Vyasa, the author of the Mahabharata, was a contemporary of
Lord Krishna and was actually describing events that he had observed
himself and in some of which he had played an important part. But
unfortunately, as I said, our Puranas have never been recognized as a true
record of our history by Western historians but have been dumped into the
category of fable and fantasy. This type of classiﬁcation had been done by
the British colonial scholars who were in reality missionaries who did not
want Indian history to clash with the views of the Bible. Destroying the
historicity of Krishna was an important part of their campaign to establish
their own religion in India. To give them their due, it might be possible that
they did not understand or realize the depth and wisdom that was embedded
in the Hindu scriptures. The sad fact is that the Indian historians, who
should have known better, blindly copied the facts given by the Westerners
in their books. Early Western Indologists in their missionary zeal tried to
put down the importance of the Vedas as well. They labeled them as
primitive mythology.
However, many great souls like Schopenhauer in Europe and Emerson in
America acclaimed the Vedas as the greatest revelations of divinity known
to humanity. It is said that when Oppenheimer, who invented the atomic
bomb, watched the explosion, he quoted from the eleventh chapter of the
Srimad Bhagavad Gita, which gives a description of Krishna in the form of
all-consuming time, which is the only killer! When asked if this was the
ﬁrst ever nuclear explosion, he replied “Yes, in modern times,” meaning
that there were many before that. In fact, there is evidence that nuclear
weapons were used in the great Mahabharata war.
Another despicable thing done by the Western historians in order to
belittle the greatness of the Aryan culture was to say that the Aryans were a
foreign race who came from Asia Minor. Modern archaeologists have
proved this to be absolutely false. Archaeology certainly does not support
the Aryan invasion theory. Recent independent studies show no evidence of
a foreign invasion occurring in India on the dates given by the historians.
The Sarasvati River is described more than ﬁfty times in the Rig Veda.
Satellite pictures very clearly show the Sarasvati rising in the Himalayas
and going to the Arabian Sea. The drying up of the river, due to many
geological reasons, is also clearly seen in the pictures. The great Vedic
culture ﬂourished all along the banks of the Sarasvati River and was
essentially a product of the holy soil of India and not an implant from
outside. This is clearly shown in the Vedas. Why did those historians not
accept the data given in the Vedas instead of going on a trip of their own in
order to establish their deeply prejudiced views, which were certainly not
supported by anything in our scriptures? This was done only with the
intention of inﬂicting their religion on India.
Unfortunately, India’s own historians have only copied all the false
observations of their country’s history, and these are the views that are
being taught to India’s schoolchildren. Brought up on Western educational
methods and books, Indian children have been taught to scorn their own
religion and doubt the reality of their gods who are the cornerstones of their
culture.
Luckily, this century, which is famous for its thirst for investigations, has
unearthed many astonishing facts. These investigations prove, for those
who need proof, that our scriptures were absolutely correct in their
description of the fabulous city of Dwaraka, which was built by Krishna as
the stronghold of the Yadavas. They also prove that Krishna was indeed the
superman or supreme incarnation of God as our scriptures declare.
When the Pandavas heard that Krishna, their dearest friend, God, and
guide, had left this mortal plane, Yudhishtira, the eldest Pandava and king
of Bharatavarsha (India), sent his brother Arjuna, the middle Pandava, to
Dwaraka to ﬁnd out what had happened to the Yadava clan. When Arjuna
reached the place, he was appalled by what he found happening. The
quotation that opens this preface is from the Mahabharata and is a ﬁrsthand
account of how Arjuna saw Dwaraka going under the sea before his very
eyes, as prophesied by Lord Krishna.
The modern city of Dwaraka is in Saurashtra and is a great pilgrim
destination since our scriptures declare it to be the seat of the Yadava clan
and Lord Krishna’s capital. However, according to the stories mentioned in
many of the Puranas, like the Mahabharata, Harivamsa, Vishnu Purana, and
so on, that fabled city of Dwaraka had been washed away into the sea soon
after the Lord left his mortal body as he had predicted.
In 1983, some excavations were done outside the modern city of
Dwaraka, which revealed the existence of a glorious city of ancient times.
The most interesting discovery was that of a set of seven temples built one
on top of the other at different periods of time. The bottom-most one was
the most interesting since it showed many pottery shards and seals that
clearly pointed to the existence of a fantastic city at about the time
mentioned in the Mahabharata. These ﬁndings encouraged the marine
archaeology center of the National Institute of Oceanography to take up
serious excavating work along the coast of the island known as Bet
Dwaraka.
The strongest archaeological support for the existence of the legendary
city of Dwaraka comes from the structures discovered in the late 1980s
under the seabed off the coast of modern Dwaraka in Gujarat by a team of
archaeologists and divers led by Dr. S. R. Rao, one of India’s most
respected archaeologists. An emeritus scientist at the marine archaeology
unit of the National Institute of Oceanography, Goa, Rao has excavated a
large number of Harappan sites, including the port city of Lothal in Gujarat.
In his book The Lost City of Dwaraka, published in 1999, he writes about
his undersea ﬁndings: “The discovery is an important landmark in the
history of India. It has set to rest the doubts expressed by historians about
the historicity of the Mahabharata and the very existence of the city of
Dwaraka.”
Conducting twelve expeditions from 1983 to 1990, Rao identiﬁed two
underwater settlements, one near the present-day Dwaraka and the other off
the nearby island of Bet Dwaraka. This tallies with the two Dwarakas
mentioned in the epic. These underwater expeditions won Rao the ﬁrst
World Ship Trust Award for Individual Achievement. Rao is to be
congratulated on his efforts in corroborating the truths of our Puranas with
evidence that can stand the test of critical analysis and scientiﬁc evaluation.
He says that further digging and diving in India’s vast treasure trove of
historical facts will further corroborate the key dates of our eventful and
glorious past.
Another important ﬁnd by the divers was a conch seal that established the
submerged township’s connection with the Dwaraka of the Mahabharata.
The seal corroborates the reference made in the ancient text, the Harivamsa,
that every citizen of Dwaraka had to carry such a seal for purposes of
identiﬁcation. Krishna had declared that only one who carried such a seal
could enter the city. A similar seal has been found onshore.
From 1998 to 2001, many underwater explorations revealed evidence
indicating a highly civilized city existed at that site with great maritime
connections with many other countries, which must have been washed away
by a tsunami or hurricane. The excavations show that Dwaraka was a large,
well-fortiﬁed city with an excellent drainage system, massive gates, and a
wall stretching about 180 miles. It was a sprawling city with gardens,
orchards, and bastions and a population of about ten thousand people. Many
clues also indicate that it must have been a bustling port. Ancient anchor
stones give ample evidence of this.
All these ﬁndings have suddenly roused a lot of interest among Hindus
both in India and abroad since it is solid proof of the existence of one of the
favorite gods in the Hindu pantheon, namely Lord Krishna.
Around the same time, archaeologists from other countries were also
busy. Along the coast of the Bay of Cambay and off the coast of modern
Dwaraka, they found evidence of a settlement deep under the sea. In
seventy feet of water, archaeologists discovered sandstone walls and
cobbled streets. Looking up the descriptions of the city of Dwaraka as
found in the ancient Hindu scriptures, they realized that this must be the
remains of the legendary city of Dwaraka ruled by the great God King,
Krishna. Wood and pottery shards were found that can be dated back thirty-
two thousand years, again proving that the time spans given in ancient
Hindu scriptures might be true even though most Westerners dismissed
them as being absurd. The city had existed from 32,000 to 9000 BCE. This
discovery proves that the life of Krishna is not mere mythology but is a
true, historical record of a towering personality who had lived on this holy
land of India. For many years now, Western Indologists have deliberately
shut their eyes to the glory that was ancient India, but hopefully these
ﬁndings should help them to believe, if they want to believe!
The west coast of Gujarat was the traditional land of the Yadavas, or
Yadus, the clan of Krishna. According to the Bhagavad Purana, Krishna led
the Yadavas on a thousand-kilometer trek from Mathura, the ﬁrst capital of
the Yadavas, toward the west coast of India to establish a magniﬁcent city
called Dwaraka, where they could start a new life, safe from their enemies
in the Gangetic plain.
The Mahabharata says Dwaraka was reclaimed from the sea. Rao’s divers
discovered that the submerged city’s walls were erected on a foundation of
boulders, suggesting that the land was indeed reclaimed from the sea.
However, after the city’s lord and master left this mortal plane, the sea
claimed back the land that had been taken from it. One cannot separate
Dwaraka from Krishna. If the city existed, then Krishna also existed.
Dr. Narhari Achar, professor of physics at the University of Memphis,
Tennessee, has dated the Mahabharata war using astronomy and regular
planetarium software. According to his research conducted in 2004 to 2005,
the titanic clash between the Pandavas and the Kauravas took place in 3067
BCE. Using the same software, Achar places the year of Krishna’s birth at
3112 BCE. Actually, our Puranas set a far earlier date.
Another very interesting fact found by astronaut technologists is that the
war between a king called Salva and Lord Krishna, which is described both
in the Mahabharata and the Bhagavad Purana, may actually have been a
description of a war with an extraterrestrial being. The Bhagavad Purana
gives Salva’s antecedents, which do not point to him being an
extraterrestrial, but it is a fact that he did get a most interesting aerial
vehicle that might have had an extraterrestrial origin. The scripture says that
Salva had done great tapas to the sun god and had been given an aerial
vehicle called the Saubha, which was as big as a palace and had miraculous
powers, like becoming invisible and appearing at different places at the
same time. The reference to the sun god might just mean that he was in
contact with an extraterrestrial planet and had got the vehicle from the
inhabitants. Salva had been itching to get his hands on Dwaraka, and when
he heard that both Krishna and Balrama were away at Indraprastha, the
capital of the Pandavas, and only Krishna’s son Pradyumna was left to
guard the city, he decided that this was an opportune moment to attack it.
He ﬂew over Dwaraka in the Saubha and destroyed the outer woodlands
and gardens. Then he directed his attack against the bastions of the city, so
that his army, which was marching over land, could easily penetrate it.
Flashes of lightning, hailstones, cyclonic storms, and clouds of dust were
released from the Saubha, which was equipped with all the latest types of
weapons. Pradyumna and some of the other sons of Krishna ably defended
the city for twenty-seven days but were overpowered by Salva’s superior
forces.
Lord Krishna heard of the attack and hurried to his son’s rescue, and there
ensued a mighty war between the superhuman Krishna and the alien Salva.
In this, Krishna is said to have ﬁred arrows that resembled thunderbolts and
balls of lightning and the brilliant piercing rays of the sun. The weapons
used by Salva make one suspect that he was using alien technology even
though he might not have been an alien. His spacecraft made of metal
seemed to appear simultaneously at different places like a UFO. But Lord
Krishna retaliated with weapons that had the force of superior spiritual
power, and Salva, who was hard pressed, resorted to magic tricks and
created the form of Lord Krishna’s father, Vasudeva, and proceeded to cut
off his head in front of Krishna’s eyes. Krishna faltered for just a moment
but then realized that this was another trick of his enemy, and very soon he
brought the Saubha down with one of his miraculous astras (missiles),
charged with the power of potent mantras (sacred syllables). But Salva
escaped and came to ﬁght with him again in the great Mahabharata war.
Krishna is famous for his lilas, or pranks and games. All these centuries,
he has kept his identity a secret and played along with the Western
historians and allowed people to think that he was only a myth of the febrile
imagination of Vyasa’s mighty intellect! But now it looks as if he has
decided that this is enough. He has chosen to reveal himself—tear open the
veil of maya in which he had shrouded himself and expose the truth of his
inspiring life to the public gaze!
It is in view of such great ﬁndings that I hope there will be a revival of
interest in the perennial philosophy of Hinduism and the glory of the
supreme incarnation of Lord Krishna will be uplifted.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Sri Krishnaya Paramatmane Namaha!
INT RO DUC T IO N
Krishna the Supreme Incarnation
Vamshi 
Vibhushita 
karam 
Navaneetharabath, 
Pitambarath
Arunabimba Phalatharoshtrath, Poornendu Sundara Mukath
Aravindanetrath, Krishnath Param Kimapi Tatwamaham na janeth.
I know of no reality other than Lord Krishna, whose face is as
radiant as the full moon, whose color is that of the fully laden rain
cloud, whose eyes are large and lustrous as the petals of a lotus,
whose lips are red as the bimba berry, whose hands are adorned
with the ﬂute, and who is clad in resplendent garments.
MADHUSUDAN SARASWATI
The story of the Lord’s manifestation in the world as Krishna, scion of the
Yadava clan, is one that has thrilled the hearts of all those who have been
fortunate enough to hear it. It is the glorious tale of how the one who is aja,
or unborn, and arupa, without form, was born with a form, in this world of
duality, and has delighted the hearts of people for over ﬁve thousand years.
It is the story of that inﬁnite, eternal one, who was born in a dungeon as
Krishna, the son of a Yadava chief, Vasudeva, and his wife, Devaki, and the
nephew of Kamsa, the king of Bhojas. It is the story of how Krishna, a
prince, was brought up as a common cowherd boy by Nanda, a chieftain,
and his wife, Yashoda, in the village of Gokula. It is the story of the birth of
God as a man. There is no tale comparable to it in all times.
The main facts of his life can be gathered from the Srimad Bhagavatam
and the Mahabharata—the ﬁrst half of the story from the former and the
second from the latter. He was born in captivity in the prison of the tyrant
king Kamsa of Mathura, as the son of Vasudeva and Devaki, sister of
Kamsa. Immediately after birth, he was transferred from Mathura to the
cowherd settlement of Gokula, where he grew up as the foster son of their
chief, Nanda, and his wife, Yashoda. As a child, he was mischievous and
willful, charming all with his precocious acts. At the age of twelve, he went
to Mathura, where he killed his uncle Kamsa, thus freeing the Yadavas from
the rule of the tyrant.
He grew up to be a hero, valiant and invincible, and gradually assumed
leadership of the Yadava and Vrishni clans, even though he did not accept
the title of king. He defeated many of the tyrant kings and made the
Yadavas into one of the most powerful forces of his time. He founded his
new capital on the island of Dwaraka, on the western seacoast of India,
which was then known as Bharathavarsha, and played an important part in
shaping the cultural and political life of his times. Though he did not take
up arms, he played a decisive part in the great war of the Mahabharata.
As a man, he was a mahayogi, the greatest of all yogis, totally unattached,
having complete mastery over himself and nature, capable of controlling the
very elements, if need be. His miracles were only an outﬂow of his perfect
unity with God and, therefore, with nature. The spiritual gospel that he
taught is known as the Bhagavata Dharma and is chieﬂy expounded in the
Bhagavad Gita, the Uddhava Gita, and the Anu Gita. The simplicity of his
teaching was such that it could be followed by any man, woman, or child,
unlike the Vedic teachings, which were meant only for the elite. The Vedic
religion had elaborated into a vast system of complicated sacriﬁcial rituals
that could be deciphered and performed only by the Brahmins and
conducted only by Kshatriyas. Out of the Vedic religion had developed the
glorious philosophy of the Upanishads, which required high intellectual
ability, moral competence, and training under a qualiﬁed spiritual preceptor,
or guru, before it could be comprehended.
The advent of Lord Krishna came at a time when the common man in
Bharathavarsha was without a simple religion that would satisfy his
emotional wants and elevate him spiritually without taxing him too much
intellectually. The Bhagavata Dharma provided a devotional gospel in
which action, emotion, and intellect played equal parts and proclaimed
Krishna as Ishvara (God), who had incarnated himself for the sake of
humanity. He could be communed with through love and service, and he
responded to the earnest prayers and deepest yearnings of the ordinary
person. Thus, Lord Krishna was not only a precocious child, an invincible
hero, and a mahayogi, he was also that supreme immaculate, whose contact
transforms even sinners into saints, ignorant men into sages, sense-bound
beings into spititual ecstatics, and animals into devotees. Krishna is the
human version of the metaphysical Satchidananda Brahman (existence-
consciousness-bliss) of the Upanishads, who took on a human form to help
the ordinary mortal to attain union with the formless Brahman (the
indivisible absolute) through bhakti or devotion alone and not merely
through the path of meditation and samadhi (superconscious state), as
advocated in the Upanishads. All his human actions during the span of his
earthly life were meant not only to bless his contemporaries and establish
righteousness on Earth, but to provide a spiritually potent account of his
earthly deeds for the uplifting of the future generations. By meditating on
these stories, one can establish a devotional relationship with him, similar to
that which his great devotees had during his lifetime. He is the expression
of the redeeming love of God for humanity, which manifests itself in
different ages and in different lands, bringing spiritual enlightenment and
bliss into our otherwise dreary life.
The theory of the avatara, or the descent of God into human form, is one
of the established beliefs of Vaishnava theism and is very difﬁcult for the
modern mind to conceive. If we believe in the unborn, impersonal godhead
of Brahman, how can we accept the fact that it can be born as a human
personality? The Vedantic view postulates that everything is divine. Every
particle in the universe is imbued with the divine spirit. Far from the unborn
being unable to assume a form, Vedanta declares that all forms are the
endless reﬂections of that one, unborn spirit, who is without beginning and
without end. The assumption of imperfection by the perfect is the whole
phenomenon of this mysterious universe and can only be attributed to the
divine lila, or play. Avatara means “descent,” and this descent is a direct
manifestation in humanity by the Divine to aid the human soul in its ascent
to divine status. It is a manifestation from above of that which we have to
develop from below. The avatara comes to give the outer religion of
humanity an inner meaning, which will enable it to grow into divine status.
The ordinary person has to evolve and ascend into the godhead, but the
avatara is a direct descent into human form. The one is a birth from
ignorance into ignorance under the shroud of maya, or the cosmic veil of
illusion, and the other is a birth from knowledge into knowledge, with all
powers intact and a full awareness and consciousness of his supreme status.
He is thus a dual phenomenon, for he appears human and is yet divine. This
has to be, for the object of the avatara is to show that a human birth with all
its limitations can still be the means for a divine birth. If the avatara were to
act in a superhuman way all the time, this purpose would be nulliﬁed. He
might even assume human sorrow and suffering, like Christ or Sri Rama, in
order to show that suffering itself may be the cause of redemption. The
Krishnavatara is unique because even in hours of sorrow and travail, he
showed himself to be a complete master of the situation, thus exemplifying
the truth of how one who is established in unity with the Divine can remain
unaffected in the midst of pain and sorrow. Hence, this avatara in the form
of Krishna is known as purnavatara, or the complete descent of the entire
divinity into the form of humanity. The Bhagavad Purana declares,
“Krishnastu bhagavan swayam.” Krishna is the Supreme Lord in his
completeness.
Even during his lifetime, he became canonized among those of his own
clan, as well as among many others. He was looked upon as the incarnation
of Vishnu, the godhead of Vaishnava theology, and the preserver, in the
trinity made up of Brahma, Vishnu, and Shiva. Vishnu later came to be
identiﬁed with the solar deity of the Vedas, who is invoked in the great
Gayatri hymn. In the course of time, Vishnu became the most dominant
among the Vedic deities and came to be accepted as the Supreme Being. By
worshipping Krishna as an incarnation of Vishnu, one can gain the status
achieved by yogis who strive through the difﬁcult forms of various yogic
practices.
The charm of this avatara is the perfection with which he played every
role he was called upon to play. He was a staunch friend, a dutiful son, an
exciting lover, and a model husband, not to just one but to all women who
desired him. There was none who called to him with intensity to whom he
did not go with speed!
“However a man approaches me, in that same manner do I go to him” was
his creed. In whatever guise people looked upon him—as son, lover, or
husband—he went to them in that very form in which they visualized him
and satisﬁed their desires in the way that was most meaningful to them. At
the same time, he sublimated their desires and thus fulﬁlled their earthly
lives and led them to eternal bliss. There was no one who approached him,
whether saint or sinner, in hatred or fear or love, who did not attain
liberation. The difference between a Kamsa, who tried to kill him, and a
Kuchela, who worshipped him, is slight indeed. One approached him with
hatred and the other with love, but both thought of him constantly and were
thus rewarded with moksha, or liberation. An object of mortal dread and
antagonism can produce as much absorption in the mind as an object of
love. If this object of dread happens to be God, concentration on him,
though motivated by antagonism, must purify the person, just as potent but
unpleasant medicine can effect a cure. This is what the Bhagavad Purana
declares.
Thus, 
Lord 
Krishna 
is 
not 
only 
the 
sat-chit-ananda, 
the
existenceknowledge-bliss of the absolute, without any diminution or
contamination of his perfection, he is also the Uttama Purusha, the perfect
person, amid all imperfect situations. He is the eternal boy, the paragon of
masculine beauty, who always retains his spiritual nobility, absolutely
unaffected and unperturbed in every situation, be it amid the poverty and
hardships of the cowherd settlement, the rigors of a hermitage, the seductive
charms of dancing beauties, the gory scenes of the battleﬁeld, the self-
destructive holocaust of his own kith and kin, or the peaceful interludes
with his friends. As he himself taught, Krishna lived in this world of duality
as the lotus leaf in water, absolutely untouched and unaffected by the
environment, a witness of situations, never a victim.
The river of time collects much ﬂotsam and jetsam on its way, and the
story of the Lord’s life has been embellished with a wealth of detail,
perhaps true, perhaps imaginary. Fact and ﬁction, truth and fantasy are
entwined. But the ﬁnal test of truth is time itself. It is the true touchstone. It
deletes the dross and retains the gold. The story of a divine manifestation is
always ﬁlled with mystery and deﬁes all attempts at human analysis. But it
has the quality of being svayamprakasha, or self-illuminating, and therefore
the person who narrates it will ﬁnd illumination coming from within, for
Krishna is the charioteer seated in the heart of everyone, the supreme guru.
In and through the seemingly redundant detail that has woven itself around
the story through the centuries, it retains its breathtaking beauty, for it is
dominated by the powerful inﬂuence of Krishna’s enchanting personality in
which the wisdom of the seer is mingled with the charm and simplicity of a
child and the glory of God gushes forth in an inexhaustible fountain of
divine love and wisdom.
The story of such a life can only be written by his grace and can only be
understood by his grace. May that grace ﬂow into us, inspire and enlighten
us, and lead us to eternal bliss!
Glory to Lord Krishna—to Vanamali—the wearer of the garland of
wildﬂowers.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Sri Balagopalaya Namaha!
PART ON E
B ala-Lila—The P lay  o f  the C hild
 
Aum Sarvapaalakaaya Namaha!
The P lay  o f  the C hild
Come to me O Gopala!
Thou I nfant Divine!
Let me dandle Thee and fondle Thee,
Nourish and cherish Thee,
Thou sustainer of All!
Let me hug Thee and kiss Thee,
Thou enchanter of all!
What need have I  for anything,
When Thou art nestling in my heart!
E x alted am I , enriched, Divine!
When Thou art dancing in my mind!
Come to me then, O Gopala!
Thou I nfant Divine!
Nourish me and cherish me,
F or I  am Thy child!
 
 
O Thou Lord of the U niverse! (Vishwanatha)
Though I ’m totally incapable of grasping
E ven the fringes of Thy inﬁnite majesty,
Yet due to Thy supreme grace alone
I  have dared to compile these lines
Containing the story of
Thy playful incarnation.
F or this I  ask Thy forgiveness.
 
May Thy choice blessings of long life, good health,
and supreme beatitude
Be showered on all those who listen
To this account of Lord Narayana,
Narrated by Narayana himself
I n the form of my beloved Lord—
Vanamali.
ADAPTED FROM THE LAST VERSE OF
“NARAYANEEYAM” BY SRI BHATTATHIRIPAD
Aum Vishnave Namaha!
1
T he Advent
Yada Yada hi dharmasya glanir bhavathi Bharatha,
Abhyuthanam adharmasya tadatmanam srijamyaham.
Paritranaya sadhunam, vinasaya cha dushkritam,
Dharmasamsthpanarthaya sambhavami yuge yuge.
Whenever virtue declines and unrighteousness prevails, I manifest
myself to protect the good, destroy evil, and to establish dharma.
For this I am born in every age!
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
This was the solemn promise made by the Lord, and for this he incarnated
himself in the city of Mathura, as the son of Devaki and Vasudeva.
Five thousand years ago, the city of Mathura was ruled by the tyrant king
Kamsa. He was the chief of the tribe of the Yadavas, who were made up of
many different clans such as the Bhojas, Vrishnis, Dasharhas, and
Andhakas. He was reputed to be the incarnation of the wicked demon
Kalanemi, and his actions proved the truth of it. None of the Yadava chiefs
dared to say a word against him, since Kamsa was known for his atrocities.
In other parts of Bharathavarsha, there also seemed to be an upsurge of
wicked rulers and a consequent upsurge of unrighteous behavior, for as the
king, so the subjects. Earth was groaning under their iniquities and unable
to bear the load of wickedness any longer, she is said to have taken on the
form of a cow and approached the Lord Vishnu, in his divine abode of
Vaikuntha. She reminded him of his promise that he would incarnate
himself whenever righteousness declined.
“So be it,” he said. “I shall incarnate myself in the city of Mathura, in the
clan of the Yadavas, as the son of Devaki and Vasudeva, to whom I made a
promise in another age that I would be born as their son.”
Pleased by this assurance, the Earth goddess began to prepare herself for
the advent of the Lord. The stage was being set for the mighty drama. All
the lesser gods and celestial beings chose to be born in the Yadava clan, to
be ready to welcome the Lord and to participate in his lila, or play. For what
reason would that unmanifest being want to manifest himself, except to
delight in his own playful exploits? The celestials knew that this was to be
the supreme culmination of all his incarnations—a tremendous play of the
Divine, clothed in human form, inexplicable and mysterious as nature
herself, yet simple and easy to love, as a ﬂower, which can be appreciated,
even by a child, but still, full of a deep and inner meaning to the scientist,
the seer, and the sage. So also the Lord’s life, when looked at with the eyes
of wisdom, will reveal to us not only the nature of the universe but our own
nature, for he is none other than the self within us.
Kamsa had a sister called Devaki, who was as pure as he was depraved.
Her beauty rivaled that of the celestials and could be outshone only by the
radiance of her mind, which was as perfect as any mortal woman’s could
be. She was a ﬁtting recipient of the signal honor of being the mother of
God. In her previous births, she had practiced many austerities in order to
get the Lord as her son. This was her last birth, and for the third time, she
was to carry the Lord in her womb. Vasudeva, too, was a noble soul who
belonged to the Yadava clan.
When the curtain rose for the ﬁrst act, the scene was one of revelry and
joy, for Devaki, the only sister of Kamsa, was being given in marriage to
Vasudeva. The bridal couple came out of the palace, preceded by Kamsa
and followed by a throng of relatives and royal guests. The fanfare of
bugles and sound of melodious songs ﬁlled the air, which was drenched
with the perfumes rising from hundreds of incense burners and the jasmine
ﬂowers scattered in profusion. Devaki herself was just sixteen years of age,
shining with happiness and beauty, laden with jewels, head bent with
modesty as well as the weight of the ﬂowers decorating it. She clung to her
brother’s arm as he lifted her into the ﬂower-bedecked bridal chariot.
Vasudeva jumped in beside her, prepared to start the journey to their palace.
Then, to everyone’s surprise, Kamsa ordered the charioteer to step down,
and he himself took the reins, as if to show the extent of his love for his
cherished sister. This act did not pass unremarked. That the king of the
Bhojas would stoop to be a mere charioteer for the sake of his sister was
news indeed! The populace cheered wildly. Though they hated him, they
could not but appreciate this particular deed, for Devaki was a great
favorite. Moreover, it was always expedient to cheer the king, for who knew
what spies were around and whose head would roll on the morrow?
Devaki, however, was supremely content. Her cup of happiness was full
to the brim, and she cast a tremulous look of gratitude at this stern brother
who had so far shown her nothing but kindness. It was her wedding day,
and she was marrying the man of her choice. What more could she want?
But her happiness was to be short-lived, as all human happiness is. The
minds of the wicked are unpredictable. They know not the meaning of true
love. They can love only so long as it beneﬁts them. They are incapable of a
love that transcends the self. This was soon to be proved.
As the procession set out, the auspicious sounds of the conch and
kettledrums were heard. The four mettlesome horses sprang forward and
were whipped by Kamsa so they went forward at a spanking pace. But
hardly had they gone a few yards when the sky became overcast, thunder
rumbled and lightning ﬂashed, and a mighty voice split the clouds and froze
the entire wedding party to immobility.
“O Kamsa, beware! The hour of your death draws nigh! The eighth son of
Devaki will kill you and deliver this land from your wickedness,” thundered
the voice in the sky.
For one startled second, none spoke, and Kamsa stared at the heavens,
while from his nerveless ﬁngers the reins fell unheeded, and there rose in
his heart a fear so great that he trembled from the very force of the emotion,
so awe-inspiring had the voice been. Devaki clung to her husband’s arm and
hid her face in terror. In a trice, the sky cleared, the sun appeared, the
rumbling died away, and the excited people started to babble. But Kamsa
wasted not a moment. J umping out of the chariot, he caught hold of
Devaki’s jasmine-laden hair and pulled her down to the ground beside him.
Drawing his sword from its scabbard, he hoisted it aloft to bring it down
upon her defenseless and jewel-laden neck. At that moment, Vasudeva
sprang down between them and catching hold of Kamsa’s hand said, “O
Kamsa! Where has your honor gone? Where has your code of Kshatriya
chivalry ﬂed, that you can think of killing your own sister, and that too, at
the time of her wedding, before her desires have been fulﬁlled? O hero! You
have enhanced the fame of the Bhojas (Yadava clan) by your heroic deeds,
and do you now stoop to such a heinous act? Death is certain for everyone.
It may come today or a hundred years hence, but it is certain. Those who do
such things will suffer both here and in the hereafter. This girl is your own
sister and helpless as a doll. It is most unbecoming of you to think of killing
this innocent creature!”
Kamsa shook off his restraining hand as if to say, “Woman or girl or
sister, what do I care? From today, she is my enemy. For me, my own life is
much more important than that of a sister!” Again the cruel arm was lifted
and again Vasudeva restrained him and tried another argument to restrain
him from his evil resolve.
“O dear brother-in-law! Why do you have to kill Devaki? What has she
done? According to the celestial voice, it is only her child, and her eighth
child at that, who is fated to kill you. Spare her therefore, and I give you my
word as a man of honor to bring every child of ours to you, be it boy or girl,
for you to do with as you wish.”
This logic seemed to work. At last, the threatening arm was lowered and
the cruel hold on Devaki’s hair loosened. Kamsa turned and looked
piercingly at Vasudeva. “What you say is true. I know you for a man of
honor, and I shall believe your word. Moreover, I have ways and means of
seeing that you do not forget your promise. Go! And take her with you. I
can no longer bear to look at her face.”
A moment ago there was none so dear to him as his sister, and now there
was none so hated. Without a backward glance, Kamsa left the couple
stranded on the streets and drove off, as the people, trembling with fear,
made way for him. Outwardly, they stilled their joy, but inwardly their
hearts rejoiced when they thought of his approaching end, and they blessed
Devaki to have a child every year so that the time would pass quickly and
the eighth child, their deliverer, would be born soon. Sadly, Vasudeva
escorted his bride to his own house, unaccompanied by music and dancing.
An hour ago, they were the most envied couple in the whole kingdom;  now,
no one dared to look at them. The people’s prayers were answered, and
within a year, Devaki gave birth to a lovely baby boy. The umbilical cord
had hardly been cut when Vasudeva hurried with the child to Kamsa’s
palace, disregarding Devaki’s pleas that she should be allowed to nurse the
child at least once. For a man of wisdom, there is no object that cannot be
given up and no sorrow that cannot be borne.
Impressed by Vasudeva’s adherence to truth and his extreme equanimity,
Kamsa said, “Let this child be taken back. He poses no threat to me. It is
only from your eighth child that I am destined to die. Take the infant back
to my sister and tell her that her brother is not as cruel as she thinks.”
Far from being happy at this show of leniency, Vasudeva was perturbed at
this unexpected turn of events, for he well knew how vacillating were the
minds of the wicked. One day he would speak thus, and the next he would
change his mind;  by then they would have become attached to the infant. It
would have been easier to have parted with it now, when it lay quiescent
and unresisting in his arms, than later, when it would start to smile and talk
and wind its little arms round his neck and his heart, thus making the
parting more heartbreaking.
So Vasudeva left the palace with a bent head, clutching the child and
trying not to look at him, trying not to love him too much, for as a wise man
he knew it was better not to become too attached to something from which
he would soon have to be parted.
Thus, six years ﬂew by on wings, and every year saw the birth of another
boy to the couple. Vasudeva would faithfully take each child to Kamsa, who
would return it as a gift. By all rights, the couple should have been
blissfully happy. They had each other, they had six lovely boys, each more
beautiful than the last, and they kept to themselves, without mixing in court
life and intrigue. They said their prayers and puriﬁed themselves by vows
and fasts to prepare themselves for the advent of their eighth child, who
would be the Lord himself. But all the time, they felt as if they were
balanced on the edge of a precipice. No one could tell when the delicate
balance would be upset, and they would be plunged into the swirling waters
below.
It was at this time that the celestial sage Narada went to the court of
Kamsa to play his small part in hastening the advent. If Kamsa started
showing signs of leniency, the Lord would take longer to incarnate himself,
for it is only when wickedness reaches its zenith that an incarnation is
called for. So armed with his vina (lute), he entered the audience chamber
of the king. Kamsa hardly glanced at him, for he did not consider a
mendicant like him, who went about singing the Lord’s praises, to be
worthy of respect. Narada, however, was unperturbed.
Strumming his vina, he said softly, “I hear, O King, that you are not
keeping too well these days, not at the peak of your powers of observation,
as you were before.”
“What?!” Kamsa said, rising up in anger. “What makes you speak such
arrant nonsense? I never felt better in my life!”
Now that the king had risen, Narada quietly took his seat, uninvited, and
continued amicably. “I hear that you had your sworn enemy within your
grasp, and yet you let him slip away like a wily ﬁsh from the hook of an
inexpert angler.”
“You heard wrong,” shouted the enraged king. “There is no enemy either
big or small who has ever come within my grasp and lived to tell the tale.
But what can you, a mere singer of ballads, know of deeds of valor?”
“I think your memory is getting poor, O Kamsa!” Narada taunted. “Have
you forgotten the prophecy at the time of Devaki’s marriage that you have
allowed six of her children to slip from your grasp? Is this the action of a
shrewd man?”
“And why not?” shouted the irate king. “Since you seem to know so
much about it, you should also know that it was the eighth child who was
denounced in the prophecy and not the ﬁrst or sixth or any other!”
“Poor Kamsa,” Narada commiserated in his gentle voice. “There is so
much you do not know. But do not make the mistake of underestimating
your enemy. He is Vishnu, the master magician, who can delude the entire
world into believing anything. He can make eight into one and one into
eight. If you count from the top downward, the last is the eighth, but if you
count from bottom upward, what happens? The ﬁrst becomes the eighth.
And if you put them in a circle and count, what happens? Any one of them
could be the eighth! You are living in a fool’s paradise, my poor man, lulled
into a feeling of false security, which is exactly what he wants you to feel.
Moreover, you should realize that this is all a master plot on the part of the
devas (gods) to kill the asuras (demons). You O Kamsa, are the great asura
of old, called Kalanemi. The rest of your clan, with a few exceptions, are all
devas, involved in the mighty plot to annihilate you and your kind. Of this
you are ignorant, poor Kamsa, and this is why, at long last, even though I
know you despise me, I came to warn you, for I am a true well-wisher of
the world. I want nothing but the well-being of the universe.”
So saying, Narada quietly left, strumming his vina, just as he had come,
unannounced and unescorted. He left behind a stunned Kamsa, aghast at his
stupidity in having let six children go free. There was not a moment to be
lost. Six years of folly had to be retrieved in a day. He summoned all his
evil counselors, Kesi, Putana, and others, and started a regular campaign of
suppression of the Yadavas with the backing of his father-in-law,
J arasandha, the powerful king of Magadha. A campaign of terror followed
in which he mercilessly murdered all those whom he suspected of being
devas, so that there was a panic among all good people and a general
exodus out of the city into the outlying districts, where they went into
hiding. Vasudeva sent his ﬁrst wife, Rohini, to the house of Nanda, the
cowherd chief of Gokula, who was a friend of his. Kamsa’s father,
Ugrasena, remonstrated with him and warned him of the consequences of
his atrocious deeds. Kamsa spoke not a word, but quietly had his father
removed and clapped into jail.
Then he turned the full force of his fury on his sister and her husband.
One by one, their children were taken up and smashed to death, on a rock,
before their horriﬁed eyes! What is it that the wicked will not resort to in
order to save their own skins? Vasudeva’s worst fears were realized. Devaki
saw but one child being killed, and then mercifully fell into a deep swoon.
Dry-eyed and stony-hearted, Vasudeva watched until the bitter end. As his
children were savaged, one thought alone sustained him: He and his wife
were still alive and capable of bearing children. Whatever happened,
however much they suffered, theirs would be the fortune to be the
instruments by which the divine purpose would be fulﬁlled. Only two more
years, he exulted, and then the prophecy would come true. Their work on
Earth would be done and the reason for their birth accomplished. So great
was his faith and devotion that not even the ghastly scene before him had
the power to move him. But even this hope was soon dashed, for Kamsa
decided that the best place for this traitorous couple would be the dungeon,
next to his father, where he would be able to keep an eye on their doings. So
he clapped them in jail, with guards on duty, night and day.
Soon Devaki conceived for the seventh time. The land was groaning
under the weight of Kamsa’s iniquities, and the prayers of the people were
raising in a constant stream, so, it is said, that the Lord Vishnu decided that
he could not wait for another year before incarnating himself. Such is the
force of mass prayer, as Narada had foreseen. The Lord commanded his
Yogamaya (embodiment of the Lord’s power of illusion), or shakti
(feminine force of action), as follows, “O Devi (goddess), you must go to
Vraja, the cowherd settlement, to the house of Nanda, where Rohini, the
wife of Vasudeva, has taken refuge. My spiritual power known as Shesha
has already entered the womb of Devaki. Transplant the fetus from her
womb into Rohini’s. Soon after, I shall incarnate myself in Devaki’s womb,
and you, O Devi, will be born as Yashoda’s daughter. You will be the
bestower of boons to all and will be worshipped on Earth, under many
names.”
Being thus ordered by the Lord, the goddess transported herself to Earth
and accomplished all that she was expected to do. The news was bruited
abroad that Devaki’s seventh pregnancy had been aborted. Hearing the
news, Kamsa suspected a trick and went himself to the dungeon to ﬁnd out
the truth.
“Is it true that you conceived for the seventh time?” he thundered.
“Yes,” replied Devaki meekly.
“Then what happened to the child?” he enquired suspiciously.
“I do not know,” she whispered, and in truth she did not, for who can
know the ways of God? She had been pregnant until a few days ago, and
then suddenly she had felt her womb to be empty.
Kamsa ruminated for a while. Trick or no, the next child would surely be
the eighth. Since prevention was better than cure, he decided to prevent the
couple from conceiving at all and gave instructions for heavy chains to be
brought. With his own hands, he bound Vasudeva to one pillar and Devaki
to the opposite, thus ensuring that there was no possibility of any physical
contact between them. Strict orders were given that they were never to be
let out together. Satisﬁed with his handiwork, he left, banging the dungeon
doors together and shutting out the last ray of hope.
“O God! What about your promise?” groaned Vasudeva. “Are you going
to desert us now in this hour of darkness? We have none but you to aid us.”
So saying, he bowed his head and was plunged in grief. At that moment, the
Supreme Lord, protector of the universe, entered into the mind of Vasudeva,
so that he began to shine in splendor like the sun. Such bliss transformed his
face and aspect that his unhappy wife felt bound to exclaim.
“O Husband!” she cried. “What is that secret thought that is drenching
you with happiness? What have we unfortunate creatures to be happy
about? O unlucky parents! We have been forced to see our children
murdered before our very eyes. Our only hope was to see the birth of our
eighth infant, and now even that hope has been dashed to the ground. What
have we to rejoice about?”
“There is a form shining within my heart, O beloved,” Vasudeva
exclaimed in rapture, “that thrills me to the very core of my being, so that I
no longer feel the hardness of the pillar to which I am bound, nor the weight
of the chains that bite into my ﬂesh.”
“O Husband!” she cried, “pray describe this vision in detail to me so that I
too can share your rapture.”
So Vasudeva transmitted to his wife through the medium of the mind that
world-redeeming aspect of the Supreme Divine, who is the all-
comprehensive being, present in all, including herself, and she received the
mental transmission, even as the eastern horizon receives the glory of the
full moon. Thus did she conceive the Lord mentally through her husband
Vasudeva.
When the jailer opened the dungeon doors the next day, he saw the cell
bathed in a divine radiance and Devaki transformed and shining, as if
within her she carried a living ﬁre, a ﬁre that would consume all the evil in
the world and leave it pure and shining. Hurriedly closing the doors, he ran
as fast as he could to the king and gave the news that something strange and
wondrous had happened to Devaki. Kamsa went posthaste to investigate for
himself. It was just as the jailer had described. When he opened the doors,
his eyes were dazzled by such a blinding ﬂash of burning blue brilliance
that he staggered back, unable to bear it.
He thought to himself, “Surely the Lord Hari (Vishnu), who is to be the
cause of my death, must be within her. Never before have I seen her with
such divine luster. What shall I do now? If I kill her outright, I shall surely
be condemned by all, so I shall wait for the child to be born and then kill
him.”
He gave orders that the guards were to be doubled, the chain
strengthened, and every precaution taken so that none entered or left the
dungeon. All his instructions were carried out faithfully, but neither Devaki
nor Vasudeva cared or even noticed what was happening around them. They
were bathed in a sea of bliss, and as the child within her womb grew bigger,
Devaki’s joy knew no bounds. She did not feel the discomforts of her
position, nor was she worried as to the ways and means of protecting the
child when it was born and caring for it until it grew old enough to kill her
brother. Such mundane considerations worried her not a whit, for she had
time only to meditate continuously on that wondrous form that ﬁlled her
being and suffused her with delight.
Kamsa, too, was in a very similar state. His mind sharpened in single-
pointed concentration on Lord Vishnu. Through intense fear, his entire
world was ﬁlled with Vishnu, even though it was of Vishnu as avenger and
killer. Waking, sleeping, eating, or talking, he constantly quaked in fear,
wondering how his killer would appear. He had heard of Lord Vishnu’s
previous incarnation, when he had jumped out of a pillar as Narasimha (the
man-lion) to kill the asura Hiranyakashipu. Thinking thus, he would
suddenly jump off the throne on which he had been sitting. He would also
inspect his bed and mattress very carefully before sleeping. He would
scrutinize every ball of rice to see if Vishnu was lurking within. Waking and
sleeping, Kamsa’s world was peopled by Vishnu alone. This was truly an
enviable state, one that meditating yogis strive in vain to achieve. Thus did
Kamsa pass the ten months preceding the advent of the Lord in constant
contemplation.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Janardanaya Namaha!
2
T he Birth of  the Unborn
Nishitethama 
udbhuthe 
jayamane 
Janardane, 
Devakya
devarupinya, Vishnu sarva guhashaya, aviraseeth yada prachyam,
dishinduriva pushkala.
At this auspicious time, in the pitch darkness of midnight, Lord
Vishnu, who is the resident within the hearts of all creatures, was
born of the divinely beautiful Devaki, like the full moon rising in
the eastern horizon.
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
With the approach of the most auspicious time when the star Rohini was in
the ascendant and all the other stars and planets were in favorable positions,
J anardana, the Lord who takes away the pangs of birth and death, the
eternal, the immortal, and the one without birth, chose to be born as the son
of Devaki and Vasudeva.
Peaceful silence reigned in all the quarters. The stars shone clear in the
sky. The rivers ﬂowed with pellucid waters. The ponds were full of lotus
blossoms. The woods were resonant with the chirping of the birds and the
buzzing of bees ﬂuttering between the trees and creepers laden with ﬂowers.
Softly blew the breeze, dust free and fragrant, and gently glowed the ﬁres in
the sacriﬁcial hearths of the holy. An ineffable peace stole into the minds of
all men. The time was approaching midnight, and many jewels sprouted in
the bowels of Earth, all the birds woke up and started crooning softly. The
sun and moon both peeped out with their full complement of stars, among
which the star Rohini was the brightest. This special conjunction of the
eighth-day moon with the constellation Rohini heralded the birth of the
Lord. Muddy waters became clear, springs gushed forth, and the waves of
the sea came rushing in to the land to try to present themselves at the spot
where the divine drama was about to commence. Little breezes carrying the
sweet perfume of a million newly opened blossoms thrust their way into the
dungeon and played with the curls around Devaki’s head as she lay in labor.
Noble people everywhere were wide awake, for they felt as if something
momentous was about to take place. The wicked slept the sleep of the dead.
In fact, Kamsa had never slept so soundly since the day of the prophecy,
and as for the guards, they were snoring so loudly that nothing short of an
earthquake would have awakened them.
The creator Brahma and the other celestials entered the labor room and
hymned the Lord, whom they could see shining within Devaki’s womb. The
sages and the gods showered ﬂowers from above. The clouds rumbled
gently in tune with the sea.
At such a time, in the pitch darkness of midnight, Vishnu, the resident in
the hearts of all, was born of the divinely beautiful Devaki. At the moment
of his birth, the prison was ﬁlled with a soft light, emanating from the babe
himself. In that one brief instant when she held him in her arms, Devaki
forgot the ordeal of the morrow, forgot the cruel death that awaited her
child, and knew only the bliss of the mother as she holds her newborn in her
arms. Vasudeva was in a trance of delight, for he saw before him that divine
form that had glowed in his heart ten months ago and that had throbbed in
Devaki’s womb ever since.
O lucky parents! What tortures would one not go through to have a sight
like this? Lotus-eyed, four-armed, sporting the conch, mace, and other
weapons, with the luminous Shrivatsa mark and the shining jewel
Kaustubha on his chest, wearing a yellow garment, possessed of the majesty
and grace of a rain cloud, locks gleaming with the luster of his diadem,
earrings studded with precious gems, and bedecked with splendid
ornaments—such was the wondrous form of the divine child that appeared
before them. Realizing the child to be none other than Hari, the Supreme
Being, Vasudeva prostrated himself before him and sang a hymn of praise.
He gazed into those glorious eyes, which were overﬂowing with love, and
felt such waves of bliss washing over him that he could no longer keep his
balance. Again and again, he prostrated before this vision, knowing him to
be indeed that formless Brahman extolled in the Vedas, which had taken on
the form of his son.
Then Devaki exclaimed, “You are verily Vishnu, the light spiritual, the
unmanifest, the vast, the luminous. I take shelter in you, the supreme
shelter. That thou, who bear the whole universe within yourself, should
have taken birth in my small womb is part of your divine lila, your
incomprehensible play by which you beguile the entire creation.”
The Lord now spoke, “O great lady! Having controlled your mind and
meditated on me in your two previous births, you had repeatedly asked for
the boon that I might be born as your son. It is in fulﬁllment of this request
that I am now taking my third birth in your womb, as your son. I have given
you a vision of my divine form so that you will recognize me. Meditate on
me, therefore, as the supreme spirit and not merely as your son, and you
will rise to higher states of consciousness and attain my state.”
Looking at his father, he continued, “Arise now and go to Gokula, to the
house of the cowherd chief, Nanda. His wife, Yashoda, has just given birth
to a baby girl who is none other than my Yogamaya. Leave me there and
bring her back.” So saying, he turned into a newborn infant once again, and
the veil of maya descended on his parents. Vasudeva was in a hurry to be
off, but Devaki refused to be hurried. Who can blame her? Once having
taken him in embrace, who is it that can bear to let him go?
Happily he went to sleep in her arms as she looked on entranced.
Reluctantly, she relinquished this bundle of bliss into the anxious arms of
her husband, who had been waiting for an opportunity to hold him to his
heart. He had forgotten to ask how a prisoner could walk out of a dungeon
at midnight and go to Gokula! But as he rose up, he found that he was free.
Wrapping the infant in his own upper garment, he held him tenderly to his
heart and went toward the massive door of the prison, which was bolted and
barred with iron. To his amazement, the bolts slid back, the locks turned,
the chains fell softly, and the heavy doors swung outward of their own
accord. Outside, the guards and soldiers slumbered heavily, and no one
woke as Vasudeva, with the baby Krishna nestling within his robes, passed
into the open. Here, there was a heavy storm, the winds raged, and his heart
was heavy with foreboding as he listened to the sound of the gushing waters
of the River Yamuna in the distance and wondered how he would ever be
able to ford it and reach the other bank on such a night. But lo! As he
stepped out not a drop of rain fell on his head, for it is said that Shesha, the
celestial serpent on whom the Lord Vishnu is said to rest, followed him with
his hoods upraised, acting as a gigantic umbrella over the divine child.
From a distance, he saw the Yamuna rising in turbulent ﬂood, but as he
came nearer, the waters parted so that he walked across with only a trickle
washing over his feet. The Yamuna wanted to have the honor of washing
the blessed feet of the one, who was lucky enough to carry the Lord.
At last, Vasudeva came with his precious burden to the village of Gokula
and to the dwelling place of Nanda, the chief of the cowherds. Softly, the
door of the farmhouse opened before him, and as he entered, he saw a light
burning within the doorway of the ﬁrst room. The lamp stood by the bed of
a sleeping mother and her newborn infant. Q uietly, Vasudeva bent down
and exchanged the children. To the herdsman’s wife he gave the divine
child and from her side he took her little daughter. Once more, he bent
down and kissed that pearly forehead. Then, with a last lingering look at the
baby’s beloved face, he slowly backed out of the door.
His sense of desolation after leaving the child was so great that he knew
not where he went and cared less. Maya Devi (goddess of illusion), who lay
in his arms, had to direct his footsteps so that he crossed the river once
again, reached the dungeon in the city of Mathura, and gave Yashoda’s baby
girl to his own wife, Devaki. He returned to the pillar and found himself
once more in chains. The doors of all the buildings remained bolted and
barred as before. Hardly had he put the child on Devaki’s lap than she
began to squall at the top of her voice. The guards jumped up in haste and
went running to Kamsa, carrying the news of Devaki’s delivery. They had
orders to wake him up at whatever hour of day or night the baby was born.
Sword in hand, without his kingly ornaments, he rushed to the dungeon,
with disheveled hair and crumpled clothes, his feet stumbling on the path.
“Where is he?” he shouted. “Where is that puling, mewling babe? It is
better to kill the cobra’s young in its nest before it can grow up and kill
me!”
“But it’s a girl,” she moaned, “and deserves to be spared. O Brother, you
have killed so many of my children, all brilliant like ﬂames. Spare me at
least this one, a daughter. Am I not your sister? The prophecy mentioned a
boy, and this is a girl. What harm can she do to you? Return her to me,
therefore, I beg of you.”
In spite of her piteous appeals, Kamsa snatched the baby from her bosom
and said, “It’s some trick of Vishnu, the master trickster. Girl or boy, what
do I care? I’ll see her in hell ﬁrst!”
So saying, he grasped the tiny feet and swung the baby around in order to
dash her down on the rock already bathed with the blood of the six other
children. But as he lifted the child aloft, she slipped from his grasp and ﬂew
into the air, and as he looked up in surprise, he saw the beauteous eight-
handed form of the goddess, decked in celestial garlands and ornaments and
armed with many weapons in each of her hands, shining above him.
She declared in a laughing, musical voice, “O fool! What use is it to kill
me? Your killer has already been born. He lives within a radius of ten miles.
I have spared you today since you caught hold of my feet. Because of that I
bless you, O Kamsa, with death at the hands of Lord Vishnu—the giver of
eternal life.” So saying, the Yogamaya of the Lord disappeared and
manifested herself under different names in other parts of the world.
Kamsa was sunk in gloom and decided to release his sister and her
husband and to beg their pardon for his atrocities. At daybreak, however, he
sent for his evil counselors, who advised him to kill all the babies in the
outlying districts as well as all holy men, for Vishnu is said to hide in the
hearts of the holy. Being thus advised by his vicious ministers, he sunk
himself in that infernal crime of infanticide and harassment of the virtuous
and let loose a reign of terror unparalleled in the history of the world. The
persecution of the virtuous leads to man’s absolute ruin. It annihilates his
longevity, good fortune, reputation, and his prospects in the hereafter.
Lord Narayana is the Supreme Reality known as Brahman.
Narayana is the Highest Self. Narayana is the Supreme Light.
Narayana is the I nﬁnite Self. Narayana is the Greatest Meditator as
well as the Supreme Object of Meditation.
“NARAYANA SUKTAM,” RIG VEDA
Whatever in this world is known through perception or report, all
that is pervaded by Narayana within and without.
“NARAYANA SUKTAM,” RIG VEDA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Nandakumaraya Namaha!
3
T he Divine Inf ant
Yo lilalasya samlagno, Gatho alolopi lolatham, tham lila vapusham
balam, Vande lilartha siddhaye.
Hail to the divine child who has taken on a form for sport. Seeing
his playful exploits, even the minds of the serious will be swayed.
May that playful form lead me to the end of the game of life!
The scene now shifts to Gokula, where for the next twelve years Krishna
beguiled his foster parents and the rest of the gopis (milkmaids) and
gopalas (cowherd boys) in a thousand ways. Those fortunate ones were able
to dandle the inﬁnite on their knees, to suckle the nourisher of the universe,
to bind that boundless and formless one, and to hold him in the circle of
their loving arms. There is no chapter in the Lord’s life so touching as this.
It explores the heights and depths of all various forms of love that a simple,
unsophisticated heart is capable of giving: vatsalya bhava, or the parents’
love for their son, sakhya bhava, or a boy’s love for his friend, and
madhurya bhava, or a girl’s love for her sweetheart. He was everything to
them—son, friend, lover, savior, and God.
The moment his father left him beside the sleeping Yashoda, the baby
opened his rosebud mouth and started yelling, as if to say, “What?! Are you
all sleeping when I enter your house? So also will I enter your hearts like a
thief in the night, but once I’m within, I’ll leave you in no doubt as to my
presence!” The whole household, which had been held in a magic slumber
till then, now sprang to life. Great was their joy when they found that the
child they remembered to have been a girl was really a boy, for that was the
only explanation that occurred to them.
“A boy!” The news spread like wildﬁre.
“A beautiful bonny boy has been born to our chief!”
The happy father rushed to the room and feasted his eyes on the delightful
scrap of divinity that shone in his room. Loud and long were his praises to
God. He made presentations of clothes, ornaments, cows, and money to all,
for the well-being of his son. He had never expected to become a father all
his life, for his wife Yashoda was already forty-ﬁve years of age. They had
almost given up hope of ever having a child and now to be blessed with a
son, and a son of such a delightful aspect;  his joy knew no bounds. When
morning came, the entire community of gopis and gopalas came to see the
child with their little offerings of butter and milk and curd, which were all
they had to give. But these they offered in the pure crystal bowl of their
hearts, and so it was more acceptable to the Lord than the costliest presents.
All those who saw him loved him as if he were their own, and this was no
wonder, for God belongs to all equally.
He was a source of unlimited bliss to the gopis, who used to ﬁnish their
housework as fast as possible and crowd into Yashoda’s house to pet him
and fondle him and exclaim over his cute ways. They forgot their homes,
their husbands, and even their own children and reveled in the bliss
emanating from this divine child. From that day onward, Vraja, the cowherd
settlement of Gokula, being the residence of Hari, also became the
playground of Sri Lakshmi, the goddess of prosperity and auspiciousness.
Since Kamsa was the king of the land, all the chiefs had to pay an annual
tribute to him. So Nanda left for Mathura to pay the taxes, with many
anxious warnings to Yashoda never to leave the child alone. Hearing of
Nanda’s arrival, Vasudeva went to meet him, for he was very anxious to
have news of his son, as well as of his son by his wife Rohini, who was also
living with Nanda.
“O Brother!” he said. “I hear I have to congratulate you. It is indeed
fortunate that you, who were childless until now, have a baby at this
advanced age. Lucky man, to be the father of such a son. And what about
my son, who is now living with his mother at your house? How is he?”
Poor Vasudeva, though not an envious man by nature, was ﬁlled with
envy at the thought that Nanda would be enjoying what should have been
his by right and his wife Yashoda would be having the extreme pleasure of
nursing the Lord. His own wife could nurse only her tears, while her breasts
dried up, unwanted and unfulﬁlled. Bitter, indeed, was this thought. At least
he had been happy that the child was safe, but now, having heard of
Kamsa’s edict to massacre all children, he was ﬁlled with dread and warned
Nanda.
Nanda said, “Alas! I have heard of all the calamities that you have had to
bear, O Brother. All things are in the hands of God. Those who know this
will not grieve.”
Vasudeva, though he longed to hear more about his sons, did not like to
keep him talking any longer, for he feared for their safety. He urged Nanda,
“I see ill omens and I fear for the safety of your child. Return to Gokula
immediately. Do not waste time in the city and never leave the child alone
or show him to strangers.” Nanda was terriﬁed when he heard this and went
directly to Gokula in his ox-drawn cart.
In the meantime, a demoness called Putana, an expert in infanticide, had
begun to move about in towns, villages, and settlements, at Kamsa’s behest,
to slaughter all infants, regardless of their sex or age. She could travel
anywhere in any form. One day, she came to Gokula, taking the form of an
attractive young woman. She had perfected an ingenious method for killing
infants. Posing as a wet nurse, she smeared her breasts with poison and
nursed the babies. The result was conclusive. When she reached Gokula,
she heard of the birth of a baby boy in the house of Nanda and went there
immediately. Putana looked like a veritable goddess when she glided into
the room where the child lay sleeping. She picked him up without realizing
that it would be her last act.
Seeing her air of authority, both Rohini and Yashoda felt embarrassed to
ask her who she was and to remonstrate with her for taking up the baby,
even though she was a stranger. Without hesitating, Putana placed the
sleeping infant on her lap and proceeded to nurse him. It is said that the
Lord deliberately feigned sleep, for he knew that if she looked into his
wondrous eyes, even she, hardened sinner though she was, would repent
and go away without attempting to kill him, and then his mission would be
incomplete. Even so, as she gazed at his sleeping face, an overwhelming
rush of maternal love ﬂowed from her, and her breasts, which were
incapable of yielding milk, gushed forth. She forgot the poison she had
smeared on them, giving the child suck and crooning to him the while. But
her lullaby soon changed to a swan song, for the little fellow, toothless
though he was, held her breast in a viselike grip and sucked with gusto;  he
seemed to drain her of her vital energy. In mortal agony, she rushed out of
the house and assumed her demonic form. At last, with a roar of pain, she
fell like a mountain in the middle of the courtyard, destroying the cowshed
and the hayrack. Her fall caused tremors in the earth and made the gopis
and gopalas tremble in fear. This was the scene that greeted the eyes of the
terriﬁed father when he returned from Mathura.
“Where’s the baby? Where’s the baby?” was the frightened clamor from
all sides.
Suddenly, they saw the infant fearlessly kicking its limbs in delight, lying
on top of the monstrous form of the demoness. The gopalas hesitated in
fear, but the gopis rushed forward, for he was more important to them than
their own lives, and took him up in their arms. They were amazed at how he
could still be alive. They did not dream that he could be responsible for the
monster’s death.
“God must have saved him in some miraculous way,” was the general
verdict.
They bathed him and performed sacred rites for his safety, such as waving
cows’ tails over his body, smearing him with dust from the hooves of the
cows, and applying dried cow dung powder to the twelve vital parts of his
body, while uttering the sacred names of Vishnu. The child submitted to all
these ministrations with secret amusement and kicked and crooned with
delight.
Since they could not cremate this huge body in the compound, they had to
hack it into bits and carry it far away to be burnt. They had expected a
terrible stench to rise from the burning carcass, but instead, the sweet smell
of sandal (sandalwood) ﬁlled the air. This was because Putana had suckled
the divine child and thus become free from every form of sin. Those sacred
feet of his, which devotees cherish in their hearts and which are the refuge
of even the sages, were placed on her lap while he sucked at her breast, so
that even though she was a demo-ness, she got the reward due to the mother
of God. If a killer of infants and a vampire like Putana attained mukti
(liberation) because she had fed him, then think of the glorious destiny of
those who offered him all that was nearest and dearest to them, as his
parents and gopis did. What then can be said of the good fortune of the
gopis and even the cows, who fed him with the greatest of love?
Never was a mortal woman happier than Yashoda, wife and queen of
Nanda, foster mother of the Lord. Day after day, she held him in her lap and
fed him and cradled him to sleep, as if he were an ordinary baby, for not
even she suspected the extent of his strength.
Putana was the forerunner of many other demons sent by Kamsa to kill
the baby. They came in various forms and guises. Needless to say, none
returned alive. Though at ﬁrst none of the gopalas realized the extent of the
remarkable powers possessed by the infant, slowly they began to have some
inkling of the vast storehouse of power that lay between those tiny arms.
Ninety days after his birth, when the star Rohini came round for the third
time, they held the ceremony commemorating his ﬁrst time to be taken
outside the house. There was a large gathering, and Yashoda bathed the
baby amid the chanting of mantras. Having received the blessings of the
Brahmins, she placed the drowsy infant under a cart to sleep. She kept a
ring of little boys to watch over him and went inside to attend the guests. At
this moment, the demon Shakata entered the cart, thinking that it would be
easy to bring it down upon the infant and kill him as if in an accident. But
he calculated without knowing the powers of his opponent.
At the very instant the cart started to fall, the infant gave a kick with his
tiny foot, and lo! the cart and all its contents were thrown to the other side
of the yard and Shakata was killed. Of his body, however, there was no
sign, for it is said that since the Lord’s feet had kicked him, even his
physical form attained liberation. Hearing the terrible cracking sound,
everyone rushed forward.
“What happened? What happened?” they asked the children who had
been looking after the baby.
“The cart fell down, and this little boy kicked it and broke it with his
feet,” they said proudly.
The people gazed in astonishment at the baby who was kicking his feet
and gurgling happily, as if to conﬁrm the truth of what the children said.
“These children are capable of making up anything,” the adults said in
disbelief.
Yashoda snatched up her baby and caressed his rose-petal feet. “Did you
get hurt, my darling?” she crooned. “Did the cart hurt you?”
“God certainly looks after your child, Yashoda!” the other gopis
exclaimed.
Not having an inkling of the superhuman might of their child, the
frightened parents arranged for many rites to be done for him to protect him
from evil forces.
After this incident, Yashoda was frightened to leave him alone even for a
minute. One evening, she was sitting with him in her lap, crooning to him
and repeating prayers, when she felt unequal to the task of bearing his
weight, for he appeared to be growing heavier and heavier. What could the
matter be? She felt that someone had cast an evil eye on him, so she placed
him on a mat and went to the kitchen to get some condiments that, when
waved above an infant, were supposed to ward off the effects of the evil
eye. Hardly had she disappeared than the child made himself lighter than
usual, for he had known of the approach of the demon, Trinavarta, who was
coming in the form of a whirlwind that engulfed the whole of Gokula in
such a cloud of dust that the entire settlement was plunged into darkness.
While the tornado was raging, Yashoda was unable to see her child
anywhere, and she collapsed in fear and started to cry. Trinavarta rose up
into the air with the baby, but soon he was unable to bear the infant’s
massive weight and found his speed dwindling, until at last he fell down
with a roar onto a huge rock and dashed himself into smithereens. The
gopalas ran to the spot where the demon had crashed and found the baby
glowing like a sapphire atop the rock. Taking up the blessed child, they
presented him to his mother. They were ﬁlled with wonder at his apparently
miraculous escape.
Poor Yashoda. Until a child starts to crawl, it can be expected to remain in
the place where it has been put. Having a baby at such a late age, Yashoda
was already an overanxious mother, and to add to this, it appeared that this
child was accident prone. She could never leave him alone even for a
minute and be sure of ﬁnding him in the same place on her return. Though
he appeared to be unscathed by these experiences, she had no way of
knowing that this was due to his own powers and not to some miracle. She
attributed it to luck or providence. How could she imagine that within him
lay the ability to protect the entire cosmos? It may have been to set her
mind at rest that one day he showed her a miracle.
As usual, she was sitting in her favorite spot on a veranda that overlooked
two huge trees in the garden and worrying about all the dangers that might
possibly befall him. With inﬁnite tenderness, she contemplated the cherubic
face in her arms. At that moment, the Lord opened his rosebud mouth as if
to yawn and lo! the mother saw the entire universe in his little mouth. She
stared fascinated. There was no doubt. The sky, Earth, the heavens, the
stars, the planets, the sun, the moon, ﬁre, air, oceans, rivers, and continents
were all inside the baby’s mouth. For a split second, she forgot herself and
the baby and felt as if she were poised on the brink of endless worlds, the
spectator of a mighty cosmic drama. At last, she could bear it no longer, and
she closed her eyes. When she opened them again, the illusion, if it could be
called that, had vanished, and she was just a mother holding her baby in her
arms.
“Rohini! Rohini!” she called. “Come here and tell me what you see in this
child’s mouth. I thought I saw something strange and wondrous.”
Rohini came running and with great difﬁculty she managed to pry open
his little mouth and shove her ﬁnger inside, only to get a sharp nip for her
pains.
“I know what’s in this child’s mouth,” she told Yashoda. “He’s teething.
That’s what you saw.”
Yashoda shook her head doubtfully. The miracle she had just witnessed
was already fading from her mind, but a lingering feeling of awe remained
and with it a certain degree of comfort. This child was not as helpless as he
looked, she thought to herself. There was no need for her to worry so much
over his welfare. He was capable of looking after himself. This thought
comforted her, and this was just what the Lord wanted.
At that time, the great sage Gargacharya, or Garga Muni, the priest of the
Yadava clan, went to Vraja at the instigation of Vasudeva, who sent him
there to perform the naming ceremony of his sons. Gargacharya was noted
for his skill in astrology, and Nanda welcomed him and requested him to
perform the puriﬁcatory rites for his child as well as Rohini’s.
Gargacharya said, “I am well known as the priest of the Yadavas, and if I
perform the puriﬁcatory rites for these children and Kamsa comes to hear of
it, take it as an indication that the child’s foe is here and take steps to kill
him.”
So Nanda begged him to perform the ceremony in some solitary place
without the knowledge of even the other gopalas. Since he knew everything
and had gone there with the express purpose of naming the child, he agreed
with alacrity. Thus, without the knowledge of any one else, the ceremony
was conducted in an empty cow barn with only Nanda, Yashoda, and
Rohini as witnesses. First, Gargacharya took Rohini’s child in his lap, since
he was the elder, and named him Balarama, because of his great strength as
well as his ability to delight everyone. Next, he lifted Yashoda’s child and
placed him tenderly on his lap. The mischievous little thing gave him a
sharp look as if to say, “You’d better give me a good name that has never
been heard before and yet one that beﬁts me and will be remembered by all
to come . . . or else . . .”
At this moment the old man felt the baby’s hands give a sharp tug at his
long gray beard, which dangled right down to the baby’s stomach and was
tickling him. Gargacharya smiled and looked into those wondrous eyes and
his heart left his keeping forever!
Krishna! That was the name for him. Krishna—the one who steals the
hearts of men, so that one who has once come into contact with him belongs
to him forever. Krishna also means “dark in color,” for the baby was the
color of the rain clouds during the monsoons. Gargacharya then outlined the
child’s horoscope and told Nanda that since he had been the son of
Vasudeva in a previous birth, he would also be known as Vaasudeva.
“Numerous are the names with which this child will come to be known
because of his qualities and achievements. Even I cannot know them all.
Mark, O Nanda! This child is equal to Lord Narayana (Vishnu) himself in
respect of fame, prowess, and excellence. Look after him with all attention.
All those who harm him will be harming themselves, and those who love
him will be ever protected.”
Krishna gurgled with delight. Here at last was one who realized his
greatness. And here was the license to perpetrate whatever mischief he
wished to do! He decided to lead the inhabitants of Gokula in such a dance
that they would never forget him for the rest of their lives.
We pray and worship the Supreme Lord Vishnu for the welfare of
all. May all miseries and shortcomings leave us forever so that we
may always be able to sing his glories. May medicinal herbs grow
in potency so that diseases may be cured effectively. May the gods
rain peace on us. May both bipeds and q uadrupeds be happy.
Peace, peace, peace.
“PURUSHA SUKTAM,” RIG VEDA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Navaneethanadaya Namaha!
4
T he Butter T hief
Balam naveena shatapatra netram, Bimbatharam sajala megha
ruchim manojnyam, mandasmitham madura sundara mandayanam,
Sri Nandanandanamaham manasa smarami.
I meditate on the enchanting form of Nanda’s darling with eyes like
the petals of a newly born lotus, lips like the bimba berry, face made
entrancing by a beguiling smile, whose color is that of a water-
laden rain cloud.
Very soon, Balarama and Krishna began to crawl about, and they got
themselves into more scrapes than any other children. There was never a
dull moment for Yashoda. In her forty-ﬁve years, she had never run so
much. She forgot her normal household duties while watching the boys at
play. Krishna would crawl forward very fast and then turn his head and look
over his shoulder when he heard the sound of tinkling bells coming from his
own anklets, as if to see who was following him. That inquiring look was
irresistible. Up she would jump, run after him, pick him up, and kiss him all
over his cherubic face. He would wriggle out of her arms and crawl as fast
as he could, with bells tinkling and feet twinkling, like twin rose petals
blown in the wind. Where was he? By the time she caught up with him, he
would be with the big mother cow, pulling off her young one with one small
hand and drinking milk straight from her udder as he had watched the calf
do. Yashoda would scream in terror, for the cow was noted for her vicious
nature, and she was already shaking her head in a menacing manner,
bringing her huge horns closer to the child. Yashoda would stand petriﬁed,
not knowing whether to run and pick up the child or whether that would
irritate the cow further. But as she stood rooted, this ﬁerce cow would put
out her rough tongue and lick the little boy as affectionately as she licked
her own calf. Krishna would turn round and look at his mother as if to say,
“See, Mother, all creatures love me, for I am the soul of all.” But, poor
mother, she would think it was another miracle, and she would snatch him
up and tell him never to do such a thing again.
So then he would follow her into the kitchen and put his hand into every
pot until he came to the one with the butter, eating some and pasting the rest
over his face, and the little kittens would come mewing and lick his face
with delight. The mother was now in a dilemma, not knowing whether to
attend her household duties or to watch the child. So playful and restless
was he that he had to be constantly guarded from the dangers of cows, ﬁre,
cats, knives, ponds, thorns, and birds.
Once he started to toddle, it was even worse. One day, Yashoda heard him
call her excitedly, and she rushed out to see him dangling perilously over
the well. “Mother! Mother! Come and see! There’s a little boy like me in
the well. Please come and take him out, Mother!”
Yashoda rushed and caught him. “Never do that again,” she admonished,
and ever after that, every time she drew water from the well, she would
imagine his face peeping from the water. There was no mischief he was
incapable of doing. The little hands were busy with everything. One
moment he would be brandishing the kitchen knife, the next he would try to
pluck the hot coals from the ﬁre. So, at every moment of the day, Yashoda
kept running after him, and for the rest of her life to come, she continued to
see his face everywhere—in the coals, in the ﬁre, in the water, or near the
cow, whether she was cutting vegetables or plucking ﬂowers. Thus did he
prepare her for the separation to come. This is a lesson to all housewives. It
is difﬁcult to ﬁx our minds on a formless God while doing mundane tasks,
but how easy to recall the mischievous exploits of that divine child, peeping
and laughing at us in and through our most tedious chores.
Sometimes, some of the other gopis would beg to be allowed to take him
to their houses for the day, and Yashoda would reluctantly agree, for she
could not bear to be parted from him, even for a moment. Once he had been
taken to a house, he would go uninvited. In fact, he would steal into their
houses like a rogue, and help himself to their ghee (clariﬁed butter), curd,
and milk, which were their prized possessions. Such is his kindness that
once we invite him into our hearts, he will come unbidden, steal the butter
of our love, and bless us with the riches we have never asked for.
One day, the gopis gathered together and began to speak of Krishna’s
pranks to his mother. The charges against him were numerous: “He comes
and releases the calves before milking time. He steals the butter, milk, and
curd, and, after consuming what he wants, distributes the rest to his
playmates, if they are there, or else to the kittens and baby monkeys who
follow him in the hope of getting something. After he has had his ﬁll, he
breaks the pots. If we scold him, he laughs at us. What should we do to
him?”
“Why don’t you give him what he wants?” asked the doting mother.
“After all, he’s only a child, and he loves these things. Why don’t you give
him a glass of milk and some butter as soon as he comes? At the end of the
month, you may present the bill, and I’ll meet it.”
“O! But we do give him!” they chorused. “We give him as much as such a
small boy can eat, but still he comes into the house unseen and steals more.
If we hang up the curd, he makes a hole at the bottom and drinks from
below as it drips down. After he has ﬁnished, his friends drink, and the last
drops are lapped up by the kittens!”
Another gopi took up the sad tale: “Once I hung the milk pot so high that
he could not reach it even with a stick, and do you know what he did? He
dragged a pounding stone from outside, I don’t know how, and then he
clambered up on it, broke the pot with a stick, opened his little mouth, and
stood there drinking the milk that was pouring down. Half went into his
mouth, some over his body, and the rest on the ﬂoor, to the delight of the
waiting kittens. Now look at him, standing there, the picture of innocence,
after having done so much mischief.”
Krishna was hiding behind his mother and peeping out, his face quivering
with pretended fright and his eyes anxiously rounded at hearing these
accounts of his misdeeds. He was sucking a worried thumb and peeping
worriedly at his mother’s face to see how she was taking it.
Yashoda’s only response was to laugh. She could not bring herself to
scold her darling for any reason. “Never mind,” she comforted the gopis.
“I’ll replace your mud pots with golden ones.”
Thus, each of them got a golden pot in lieu of the mud pot he had broken,
and this was exactly what he had wanted, for he wanted them to enjoy all
the luxuries that were there in his own house.
But still the complaints grew, so Yashoda started watching her little son
very carefully to ﬁnd out when he went and perpetrated these misdeeds. She
soon came to the conclusion that he could never have done any of the
crimes that were being laid at his door, for the simple reason that he was
never out of her sight for more than a few minutes at a time. “Is it possible
that these gopis are making up these stories to get golden pots?” she
wondered.
J ust then another gopi came with a different tale. “J ust listen to this,
Mother,” she said. “You know that I’ve started being very careful with my
things and always keep them locked so that Krishna can’t get them.
Yesterday, he was really angry when he found nothing to steal, so he gave a
pinch to my little daughter and made her wake up and scream just as he was
leaving.”
Krishna grinned when he heard this, for that child was Radha, who was
going to be his beloved playmate in the future, and he was asking her,
“Why are you wasting time sleeping when you should be concentrating on
growing up? What knowledge can you have of happiness that makes you
smile now? I’ll show you such delights that nothing else can be
comparable.” So saying, he had pinched her, and she had awakened
squealing. Yashoda could not believe what the gopi was saying, so she said,
“Well, next time he does something of that kind, just catch him and bring
him to me and I’ll punish him.”
The gopi agreed doubtfully, for she knew him to be a slippery customer;
however, with a little luck she managed to catch him red-handed the next
day when he was actually standing with his hands in a pot of butter. She
grabbed him by his buttery hands and dragged him to the house. J ust as they
reached the turning, he said, “Look! What’s that?”
She relaxed her hold and turned to look and poof! His buttery hand
slipped out of her grasp, and off he went like a streak of blue light. She
panted after him, but he was all quicksilver and she was all lead! She puffed
into his house and found him sitting in his mother’s lap on the swing,
looking the picture of cherubic innocence.
“Aha! So this is where you have got to, is it?” she asked. “Look,
Yashoda! I had caught this child stealing butter hardly ten minutes ago, and
I was dragging him here to show you. J ust as we reached the turn, he was
off like a shot, and now look at him, sitting here as if butter would not melt
in his mouth!”
Yashoda looked at her in astonishment. Now she was sure that the gopi’s
powers of fabrication were enormous. “What are you talk about?” she
asked. “This child has been sitting on my lap listening to a story for the past
one hour. How can he possibly have been with you ten minutes ago?”
The gopi stared. She should have expected this, she thought resentfully.
Naturally, a mother would side with her child. But a barefaced lie! How
could Yashoda make up such a story? The two of them kept silent, while
Krishna smiled. At last, seeing the gopi’s crestfallen look, Yashoda said
kindly, “Never mind. Next time you catch him be sure you tie him up
securely and bring him to me, and I promise to punish him.”
Happily for the gopi, she was able to test the truth of this promise the very
next day. Krishna allowed himself to be caught, for after all, she was
Radha’s mother. Determined to take no more chances, she put him inside a
big, heavy chest in a corner, locked it up, and pocketed the key. “J ust you
wait there, you little rogue, and think of some mischief while I ﬁnish my
work and take you to your loving mother. Then we’ll see.” After ﬁnishing
her work, she lugged the heavy chest up the small incline leading to
Yashoda’s house. “Here he is,” she panted in triumph. “Here’s your
innocent son. I’ve caught him and locked him up, as you suggested.”
“When did you catch him?” Yashoda asked curiously.
“Soon after lunch,” Radha’s mother replied. “He joined us for lunch and
then left very properly by the front door, only to creep in through the back
gate and steal butter from the larder. Mind you, this was not even for
himself, for he was too full after the heavy lunch I gave him. I caught him
distributing the day’s butter, the result of a hard morning’s labor, to the cats
and monkeys.”
Yashoda gasped. “Either you’re mad or I am,” she said. “Krishna had his
lunch with us today. In fact, he sat between his father and his brother, and
he’s been playing here ever since. Now open the chest and let’s see who is
right, you or I.”
Without hesitation, the gopi went and opened the chest, for she had no
doubt who was right. Both of them peered into the chest and lo! staring at
them with tear-ﬁlled eyes was the gopi’s own daughter. Yashoda had a
hearty laugh. “Well, well, I never realized your eyesight was so poor!”
The poor gopi was completely bewildered. How could she grasp the fact
that God can appear in all places at the same time, for he is everywhere?
After that, she never dared to go to Yashoda with her complaints, and her
devotion and love for Krishna grew day by day. Her little daughter grew up,
seeing her great devotion, and from that time onward gave her heart to him.
One day, the bigger children, including Krishna’s brother, Balarama,
rushed out to eat the fruits of a tree growing in the compound. Krishna
loved those fruits, so he toddled after them even though nobody had thought
of inviting him. They shooed him off, as being too small to climb trees.
Still, he insisted on accompanying them, so they agreed to give him the task
of picking up the fruits as they fell.
“Now mind you, do not eat a single one,” they, warned, knowing his
capacity for food. “Your job is only to collect the fruits, and we’ll come and
divide them equally.”
“All right,” he said meekly.
The big boys, including Balarama, scrambled up and started dropping
bunches of lovely, ripe, purple fruits to the ground. Krishna started to pick
them up and gobble them as fast as he could. He crammed them into his
mouth, his little hands going up and down like pistons, from the ground to
his mouth. After some time, one of the boys chanced to look down and
discovered what was going on. “Hey! Stop that nonsense at once!” he
shouted. “Look at Krishna,” he called to others. “He’s eating the fruit
instead of collecting it!”
“Stop! Stop!” all of them shouted from the top of the tree. All the little
heads popped out from among the branches, shouting angrily at Krishna,
who seemed supremely unconscious of the whole affair and continued to
cram his mouth. The purple ﬂuid was oozing down the corner of his mouth,
and in his hurry to eat as much as he could, he had not even cleaned the
fruit. Q uite a bit of mud also found its way into his mouth. The boys came
sliding down and shook him hard. “What do you think you are doing?” they
shouted.
Krishna did not speak a word for the simple reason that his mouth was
packed with fruit.
“All right, we’ll show you,” they cried and ran inside searching for his
mother.
“O Mother!” they cried. “Your son is eating mud!”
Yashoda came running to ﬁnd out what the commotion was all about.
“Your son is eating mud!” they cried, pointing accusingly at Krishna.
“Have you been eating mud?” she repeated sternly.
Krishna shook his curly head and started snifﬁng loudly, as a prelude to a
big howl. He dared not open his mouth yet, for he had not quite ﬁnished
swallowing the fruit.
“Ask him to open his mouth, Mother!” Balarama urged. Krishna glared at
him as if he could not believe that his brother would stoop to such a low
trick.
“Yes, ask him to open his mouth,” the rest of the boys chorused.
“Open your mouth, Krishna,” Yashoda said sternly.
Krishna turned his limpid gaze on her. “Have you forgotten what
happened when you looked into my mouth the last time?” was the unspoken
question.
She had indeed forgotten or probably misunderstood. If so, the time was
propitious for another lesson. Or perhaps, he thought, if she wanted to see
mud, she could have her ﬁll of it!
And the Lord who had become a human child out of sport, without any
loss of his divine powers, now opened his rosebud mouth. She bent forward
to peer more closely, and lo! she felt herself to be whirling in space, lost in
time, for inside the baby’s mouth was seen the whole universe of moving
and unmoving creation, Earth and its mountains and oceans, the moon, and
the stars, and all the planets and regions. She was wonderstruck to see the
land of Vraja and the village of Gokula, herself standing there with the child
Krishna beside her with a wide-open mouth, and within that mouth another
universe, and so on, ad inﬁnitum!
“O God!” she thought, “Am I going mad or is this a dream or the magic
wrought by this strange child of mine? “Krishnaaa . . . ,” she cried, clinging
to his name like a drowning person to a lifeline. “Krishnaaa . . .” It was a
despairing cry, for she felt her head whirling. Immediately, he shut his
mouth, and she got back her equilibrium. In a trice, she had almost
forgotten what she had seen. “Why have you been eating . . .” she stopped
in midsentence. What a fool she was! This child carried the whole universe
within himself, and she was worrying about a few grains of sand! “Krishna!
O Krishna!” she whispered, snatching her boy in her arms. “Who are you?
Who are you? Who are you?” she murmured, nuzzling his baby curls with
her lips. Before the astonished gaze of a dozen small boys, she carried her
darling inside, caressing him and cooing endearments to him. The boys
gazed after her in disappointment. You really could not tell with adults, they
decided. There was no saying how they would react. They had fully
expected to enjoy the spectacle of Krishna howling for mercy from an irate
mother, and look at her hugging and kissing him!
He, whom the Vedantins (followers of the Vedas) speak of as Brahman,
whom the yogis consider the atman (individual soul, divinity within each
soul), and whom devotees call Bhagavan, that supreme one was considered
by Yashoda to be her own son.
May we be able to know Narayana. F or that do we meditate on
Vaasudeva. May Vishnu guide us.
“NARAYANA SUKTAM,” RIG VEDA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Damodaraya Namaha!
5
Bondage of  the Boundless
Damodara gunamandira,
Sundara vadanaravinda govinda,
Bhava jaladhi madana Mandara,
Paramam dharma panatha twam me.
Damodara, thou abode of good qualities!
Govinda! With the beautiful lotuslike face!
Do thou churn the sea of mortality with Mount Mandara and bestow
on me a little of that immortal nectar!
One day, Yashoda got up early to assist the maids in churning curds. She
left the sleeping Krishna and tiptoed out of the room to boil the milk and
churn the curds before he woke up. It so happened that he woke up soon
after and was quite annoyed to ﬁnd her missing. Even though he was about
three years old, according to the custom, he had not yet been weaned, and it
was his usual habit to have a good feast as soon as he got up. He shouted for
his mother, but the noise made by the wooden churn, as well as the fact that
she was singing songs about him, drowned out his baby voice. By now, he
was thoroughly disgruntled and decided to go down and investigate. “Ah!
There she is, busy churning curd when she should be feeding me!” he
thought, as he spied her from the door. Running to her, he caught hold of
the churning rod and put a stop to the whole operation.
She turned to look at him. Her eyes melted with love, and her breasts
started to ﬂow of their own accord. He was such an enchanting sight. His
bunch of curls was sprouting from the top of his head where she had tied it
the previous evening, with a single peacock feather stuck in the middle. His
eyes were smudged with collyrium, due to the tears he had shed, and even
now, one tear was precariously balanced on a lower lid, wondering whether
to fall, loath to leave that lovely eye. His lips were pink, with the full lower
lip thrust out, in a delicious pout. She caught him to her in a tight embrace,
and loosening her garment, she started to feed him. Both mother and son
were thoroughly enjoying this interlude, he sucking with gusto and she
watching with great tenderness, when suddenly she heard the hissing noise
of the milk boiling over on the ﬁre. Placing the child down on the ﬂoor, she
ran to rescue the milk. Krishna was furious. His eyes became red and his
lips trembled. It was bad enough to have been deprived of his pleasure in
the morning, but this was the very limit! To be dumped like a sack of
potatoes when he had not ﬁnished drinking his ﬁll! He would show her! He
took up the heavy wooden churn and brought it down with a bang on the
mud pot containing the curd she had been churning. The buttermilk gushed
out with a gurgle, with the blob of butter in the middle. With make-believe
tears in his eyes, he looked aghast at what he had done. Deciding that
discretion was the better part of valor, he hurriedly trotted off on his chubby
legs. At the door, he turned and looked back. The blob of butter looked too
inviting. Moreover, he was still hungry. He trotted back, rescued the butter,
and ran to the veranda, where there was a big, rice-husking mortar. Seating
himself precariously on top of this, he proceeded to enjoy his stolen feast,
throwing a few lumps to the kittens now and again. Yashoda returned after
rescuing the milk and saw the mess he had made on the ﬂoor. But of the
child there was no sign. She tiptoed out and saw him sitting on the mortar,
glancing here and there with the pretended fear of discovery written large in
his eyes. She approached him slowly from behind. Turning around, he
caught sight of her, jumped down, and ran away, as if in fear.
She gave chase to him, who cannot be caught, even in the mind of a
meditating yogi, puriﬁed by austerity. Crying and rubbing his eyes with
buttery ﬁngers, looking back anxiously at his mother who was slowly
catching up with him, he ran and hid behind the mortar. When she saw his
fear, she threw away the stick she had been carrying and decided to tie him
to the mortar. Q uickly, she returned with the longest and strongest piece of
rope she could ﬁnd. Creeping up to the stone, she suddenly threw it over
him and said, “Now I’m going to tie you up!”
At these words, a tuft of curls bobbed up over the stone, followed by two
anxious eyes, one tiny nose, and a pair of buttery lips ending in a
determined chin, that lifted itself up and rested on top of the stone.
“I’m going to tie you up,” she repeated, hardening her heart against the
plea in his enchanting look. His eyes looked down, but there was a mocking
gleam in them. He was the unmanifest Supreme sporting as a human child,
whom this gopi took to be her own son and was trying to fasten to the
mortar. Determinedly, she wound the rope around his waist and found it
short by two ﬁngers. So she attached another rope and wound it twice
around him and again found it short by two ﬁngers. She attached another
rope with the same result. Thus, she exhausted all the ropes in the house,
and still there was a shortage of two inches to complete the round. The
other gopis, who had come to watch the fun, now began to laugh at
Yashoda’s predicament. As for her, she could not imagine what the matter
was. She was still to learn the folly of trying to bind the one who is
boundless. The mocking gleam was more pronounced, and the gopis started
tittering among themselves and whispering, “She did not believe us when
we told her, and see, now she herself is suffering!”
The poor mother was desperate. She cast an imploring look at her little
son. Seeing the pathetic state of his perspiring mother, with hair disheveled
and ﬂowers falling, Krishna felt pity and allowed himself to be bound. Not
even the gods could attain as much grace from him as he showed to this
gopi, his mother, for the rope of love is the only cord capable of binding the
boundless.
“J ust you stay there, you naughty boy,” she said sternly, as she bound him
with ease, thereby hoping to convince the others that she was fully capable
of punishing the little rogue. Everyone drifted away, leaving him alone. His
mother also went inside after admonishing him once more.
Luckily, he had thought of hiding some of the butter in the hole in the
mortar. He took it out and had a small feast, but soon he became quite
bored. What was he to do now, since he had given an unspoken promise to
his mother to remain tied? Suddenly, he spied a pair of gigantic trees in the
distance. They were growing very close to each other. In fact, between them
there was such a small gap that only a very small boy like him could
manage to squeeze through. He was struck with a desire to put his theory to
the test. Now was as good a time as any. He set off at a brisk trot on his
chubby legs followed by a grumbling, rumbling pounding stone. In all its
life, it had never been treated so ignominiously. It hardly beﬁtted a stone of
its dignity to be bouncing up and down in the wake of a small boy like this!
Krishna had reached the trees and passed with ease through the gap between
them, thereby proving his point, but the poor stone got well and truly stuck.
Krishna looked back and saw the impediment.
“One, two, three,” he said and gave a slight tug. Both the trees crashed to
the ground with a horrendous noise. In their place stood two handsome
celestials. They were the sons of Kubera, the god of wealth, and were
known as Nalakubera and Manigriva. They had been cursed by the sage
Narada, in order to curb their pride, arising from the intoxication of wealth.
The spell could only be lifted by the touch of the Lord, who had embarked
on this particular game to fulﬁll the words of his devotee, Narada. With
folded palms, they bowed low and extolled him.
“Bless us, O Lord, for we are the servants of your devotee Narada. It was
by his blessing that we have this opportunity to see you. In the future, may
our words be always devoted to the narration of your excellence. May our
ears be always listening to the accounts of your deeds. May our hands be
ever engaged in performing work for your sake. May our minds ever rest in
constant remembrance of your feet. May our heads always remain bowed in
reverence before your temple, which is the whole universe.”
Hearing this, the Lord was pleased. He blessed them and sent them back
to their abode in the Himalayas. The celestials rained ﬂowers on him and
addressed him with a new appellation—Damodara, the one with a rope
around his waist.
Hearing the terriﬁc sound of falling trees, Nanda and the gopalas rushed
to the place to ﬁnd Krishna sitting happily on the mortar eating the small,
black berries from the tree. Nanda now proceeded to liberate him, who is
capable of liberating all souls. Yashoda anxiously inspected him for bruises,
but could ﬁnd none. Everyone commented on the miraculous way in which
this child managed to escape from danger.
Another day, when Krishna was toddling through the streets on another of
his nefarious errands, he saw an old lady laboriously carrying a basket of
fruit that she had managed to collect from the forest.
“Give me some, give me some!” he lisped, running to her and tugging at
her garment.
She looked at that cherubic face and was lost. “I generally sell my fruits
in exchange for grain, but for you I’ll give my whole hoard free,” she said.
Krishna, the bestower of the fruits of action to all, refused to take
anything free. “My father is very rich. He has plenty of grain. Come with
me, and I’ll give you as much as you wish,” he said.
So saying, he darted off like a blue arrow, and the woman labored after
him. This way, that way, she saw ﬂashes of blue ﬁre and soon came to his
house. By this time, Krishna had darted inside, imperiously calling his
mother to get the grain. But Yashoda had gone out for a visit. The house
seemed deserted. What was he to do? Going inside, he grabbed as much
grain as his little hands could hold, and with the greatest concentration, he
walked with bated breath, gazing ﬁxedly at his hands so that not even a
single grain would fall. But despite his best efforts, all along his passage the
grains slipped through his baby ﬁngers. When he emptied the two ﬁstfuls
with a sigh of relief into her basket, it was doubtful whether there were
more than ﬁve or six grains altogether. The child beamed with joy at his
own efforts and looked happily at the old lady. She smiled tenderly at him
and wiped the beads of perspiration from his forehead with her torn
garment.
Then she sat down on the steps and made him sit in her lap. She took a
ﬁstful of berries from the basket and ﬁlled his cupped palms. Two more
were needed to ﬁll them to the brim. She turned to search for two big
berries to place on top, and when she looked around, his hands were empty.
Once more she ﬁlled them, and once more the same thing happened. This
kept on, until the last berry was in his mouth and the basket empty. “Are
you satisﬁed now, my precious?” she inquired anxiously.
He nodded his head vigorously, so that the bunch of curls bounced up and
down. He could not speak, for his mouth was too full. Though she had
received only a few grains in return for her entire store of fruit, the old
lady’s heart was ﬁlled with unspeakable joy. Lifting the empty basket onto
her head, she walked forward with a lilt. She had hardly gone a few steps
when she felt a great weight on her head, and putting the basket down, she
found that it was ﬁlled with precious gems as big as the fruits. They
sparkled in the sun, glistening and gleaming—some black like Krishna’s
eyes, winking at her in mischief, some blue like his body as he darted
before her like a ﬂame, some pink like his palms upturned to receive her
fruits. Everywhere, her poor old eyes were dazzled by glimpses of him
among the gems. Nothing more of him could she see, but she did not mind,
for inside her heart his form shone forever.
Who can explain the lila of this divine being who played these pranks to
the delight of the simple cowherds of Gokula? Assuming the role of a
village child, he sang and danced at the command of the gopis as if he were
a sort of puppet. He fetched and carried for them, played and pranced for
them, and ran to do their bidding, to show that he was one who subordinates
himself to fulﬁll even the slightest wish of his devotees.
Nanda and the other elders among the gopas now started to feel alarmed
at all the extraordinary happenings in their settlement and the number of
miraculous escapes this child seemed to be having. They had a conference
to decide what best could be done. An old man called Upananda declared
that there was some evil spirit in that place and that God alone had
protected their child and kept him from harm. He suggested that it would be
better to shift to a new place before any further calamity took place. The
nearby forest of Vrindavana was noted for its beauty and had plenty of
virgin pasture for the cows. This was an important point for them since they
depended on their cows for their livelihood. All of them readily agreed to
make the move, and they got their carts ready and started on the trek. The
old men, the women, the children, and their possessions were loaded on the
carts, and the cavalcade set forth with the cows marching in front, the carts
following, and the men and priests behind, the men carrying bows in their
hands. How picturesque was the way and how lovely the scene! The calves
lowed softly as they ran to keep up with their mothers, the bells on the
horns of the bulls tinkled merrily, keeping time with the bells on the wheels
of the carts. The gopalas blew their horns and trumpets, and the gopis
sitting in the carts sang lyrics about the pranks of their beloved Krishna.
Balarama and Krishna were seated in a new cart on the laps of their
mothers, and neither Yashoda nor Rohini felt the tediousness of the journey,
listening to their prattle. They jolted along in the carts until the sun set in
the west, and they reached the outskirts of Vrindavana, which was bathed in
the soft glow of the setting sun. The prominent landmark of the Govardhana
hill loomed in the background, the River Kalindi (or Yamuna) was like a
beautiful damsel rushing with delight to meet her lover, and the abundance
of ﬂowering trees and bushes drenched the air with their perfumes. They sat
for some time soaking in the charm of their ﬁrst night in the forest of
Vrindavana. Fortunate indeed was this place, where all the trees and every
blade of grass must have been great sages in a previous life to have the
good fortune to feel the divine feet of the Lord dancing over them, his lotus-
petal body brushing them, and his perfumed breath invigorating them.
Since they were a nomadic tribe, used to constant moves, the gopas
cleared the land and set up their dwelling places in no time. Small boys up
to the age of ﬁve were allowed to tend the calves. Krishna begged his
mother to be allowed to go with them. Reluctantly, she agreed, for she could
not bear to be parted from him. Her heart yearned after him, and her eyes
followed him until he was no more than a small blue dot in the distance,
with the morning sun creating a halo around his head from the dust raised
by the hooves of the calves. All the boys carried toys with them. Once they
reached a grassy plain, they would allow the calves to graze while they
amused themselves. Sometimes they played on ﬂutes, sometimes with their
catapults, sometimes with balls, and sometimes with masks, in mock
bullﬁghts, bellowing like bulls and charging at each other. Thus, he played
with those fortunate gopalas like an ordinary child.
But while they were leading their idyllic existence in the forest, Kamsa
was in a fever of impatience in Mathura. The three demons he had sent to
Gokula had never returned, so he strongly suspected that his enemy was
hiding in the cowherd settlement, and he called his assistants and sent them
to kill the boy Krishna, whom he suspected of being none other than his
sister’s son.
One day, while Krishna was standing playing the ﬂute, he spied a calf
behaving in an extraordinary manner. It was one of Kamsa’s assassins who
had taken on a calf ’s form in the hope of remaining unnoticed. But the
divine intelligence could never be bafﬂed, and Krishna caught hold of the
calf ’s hind legs and tail together, whirled it round and round, and hurled it
to the top of a tree. As a huge carcass of the demon came hurtling down, it
brought down a number of fruits and ﬂowers. Krishna continued his
interrupted ﬂute playing while the other boys rushed to inspect what was
happening. They saw the ﬂowers and fruits falling all around him and
asked, “What happened, Krishna? From where have all these ﬂowers and
fruits come?” Krishna told them the story and showed them the body of the
dead demon.
One day, they went to the lake so that the calves could drink water. While
they were drinking of the crystal-clear waters of the lake, the boys were
terriﬁed to see a huge crane ﬂapping its wings and advancing threateningly
toward them with parted beak. It was a demon called Baka, and it rushed at
Krishna and swallowed him. The other boys were petriﬁed and could do
nothing. But the crane spat him out as fast as it had swallowed him, for it
felt as if it had swallowed a live coal, so hot had the Lord’s body become!
Undaunted, it tried to pierce him with its sharp beak, but Krishna pried it
open and tore it apart as easily as one would split a blade of grass. The boys
were ﬁlled with wonder and reported all the events of each day when they
reached home. The elders listened to all these strange tales in growing
amazement and marveled at the prowess of this unique child in their midst.
How happy were the years that Krishna and Balarama spent in the forest
of Vrindavana with their companions. The weather never grew too hot in
summer, nor did the grass become dry. The trees were always laden with
blossoms, and a gentle breeze blew over the foreheads of the boys. In
spring, they would play on the swings or they would dance like peacocks,
quack like ducks, leap over the streams like frogs, or make a ring and try to
catch Krishna as he darted between their entwined arms. Even the animals
had a special love for him, and the cows lowed happily when he went near
them and caressed them. Bedecked with garlands made of wildﬂowers, he
would imitate the stately tread of the swans and the cries of birds.
Sometimes, tired after the bouts of boxing with his friends, he would rest
with his head on a bed of ﬂowers they had made for him. In this way, hiding
his identity by the power of his own maya and assuming the form of a
common cowherd boy, he who was in reality the Supreme Divine lived a
rustic’s life amid the humble rural folk. But whatever he did he did to
perfection, throwing himself heart and soul into the role he was enacting.
The ﬁrst creator (Brahma) knew the Supreme Person. He in turn
made him known to I ndra (king of the gods) for the beneﬁt of all
beings. Hence, even today he who knows him and the creation thus,
as pervaded and permeated and possessed by this Supreme Person,
attains immortality. There is no other way for spiritual perfection.
“PURUSHA SUKTAM,” RIG VEDA
He who works not for an earthly reward, but does the work to be
done, he is the sannyasi, he is the yogi;  not he who does not light
the sacred ﬁre, nor offers the holy sacriﬁce.
The sannyasi who renounces is also the Karma yogi. No one can be
a yogi without surrendering his will. The mind is indeed restless, O
Arjuna, it is indeed hard to train, but by constant practice and
dispassion it can be trained.
When the mind is not in harmony, divine communion is hard to
attain, but the man whose mind is in harmony attains it, provided he
knows and strives.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Gopalaya Namaha!
6
Brahma Bemused
Bibrath venum jadarapathaye, sringa vethre cha kakshe,
Vamepanau masarinakavalam, tad phalanguleeshu,
Thishtan madhye swaparisuhritho, hasayan narmabhi swai,
Swarge loke mishathi bhubuje, yajnabuk balakeli.
The celestials looked on in wonder at the sight of him to whom all
the offerings at yajnas (sacriﬁcial ceremonies) are made, sitting in
boyish delight to take his food amid his playmates, with a ﬂute
stuck in his waist, a horn tucked into his left armpit, a staff in his
left hand, a ball of curd rice in his right hand, and various delicacies
between his ﬁngers, sitting in a circle made by his friends, cracking
jokes and making them laugh.
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
One day, Krishna got up very early, for he had decided to have a picnic in
the woods. He blew his horn loudly to wake up his companions and set out
with the calves. The boys danced and frolicked as they went, carrying their
slings, sticks, horns, ﬂutes, and mud pots with their lunches. Though their
mothers had adorned them with golden ornaments, they embellished
themselves further with leaves, ﬂowers, peacock feathers, and mineral
powders. Some buzzed like bees, some cooed like pigeons, some ran under
the shadows of ﬂying birds, some pulled monkeys by their tails, some
climbed trees, jumping from one branch to another, and some chased the
frogs through the streams. How can one describe the good fortune of those
inhabitants of Vrindavana before whose physical eyes stood he, whom yogis
fail to attain despite austerities practiced in many lives?
At this time, a demon named Agha, Putana’s brother, made his
appearance in the form of a huge python. He lay in wait for the boys with
his mouth open like a cave. The boys, on seeing him, thought him to be
another extraordinary feature of the scenery of Vrindavana. He had kept his
huge tongue hanging out, and they mistook it for a newly made road and
ran into his gaping mouth before Krishna could stop them. Instead of
swallowing them immediately, the demon kept his jaws open in the hope
that Krishna would enter. Though he knew who it was, Krishna entered
Agha’s mouth and there grew in size so that very soon Agha could not
breathe. Eventually, he suffocated to death. As the boys, led by Krishna,
came out of the body of the monster, they saw a radiance coming out of the
python and merging into Krishna.
After this, Krishna led them to the sandy bank of the Yamuna, which was
an ideal place for a picnic. First, they let the calves drink their ﬁll and let
them loose near some grass. Then they placed Krishna in the middle and sat
around him in circles, looking like the petals of a lotus. They ate from plates
made of leaves, bark, and petals. Think of the sight of him, to whom the
most delicious food offerings are made at costly sacriﬁces conducted by
kings, sitting in the midst of his friends, sharing their simple fare, joking
with and teasing them, and offering them delicacies from his own hoard.
Seeing this unique sight, the creator Brahma was steeped in wonder.
Desirous of seeing more of this divine child’s play, he spirited away the
calves into his own world, known as Brahmaloka.
After enjoying this delightful interlude with the Lord, the boys noticed
that the calves were missing. Krishna told them not to interrupt their meal
and that he himself would bring back the straying calves. Still carrying a
half-eaten ball of rice in his right hand and a staff in his left, he wandered
off in search of the calves. In the meantime, Brahma came and spirited
away the boys as well. Unsuccessful in his attempt to ﬁnd the calves,
Krishna returned to the riverbank to ﬁnd that the boys had also vanished. It
dawned on him that this was a joke by the creator Brahma. He decided to
play along with him. In the evening, when it was time to return home, they
were still missing, so he took on the forms of all the missing boys and
calves, the sticks and slings, and the pots and ﬂutes. This is the experience
of the yogis in God consciousness, when they see all things, including
inanimate objects, as divine.
As the calves and gopalas, as the toys and vessels, and as himself, the
soul of all beings, Krishna entered Vraja. As this remarkable contingent
returned, the gopis and mother cows, instead of welcoming Krishna ﬁrst, as
was their habit, ran to their own children and calves, for everyone and
everything was Krishnamaya (ﬁlled with Krishna’s being). Therefore, on
that day, no one saw any difference between their own children and
Yashoda’s child.
A jivatma (embodied soul), due to its past karma (results of past actions),
is born in our wombs, and we pet it, fondle it, and call it our own—ﬂesh of
our ﬂesh. But Krishna is more than our ﬂesh. He is the Paramatma (supreme
soul). Naturally they loved him more dearly than their own children. For
one full year, this impersonation went on, and every evening when the little
cavalcade consisting of so many Krishnas returned to the village, the gopis
bathed him and fed him and fondled him and put him to sleep in all their
houses. With the cows it was the same. Thus did the Lord spend one year in
the houses of the gopis as their own sons and in the cowsheds as the calves.
In the mornings, he would set out to the forest tending himself as calves and
gopalas. This was to fulﬁll the desire of the gopis to have him as their son.
Balarama, who was the incarnation of the Lord’s power as Shesha,
noticed these startling signs of overwhelming affection by the gopas and
gopis for their own children instead of for Krishna and realized that it was
all the play of the Lord. He tackled his brother about this and was let into
the secret.
A human year is only a minute to Brahma, so when he came back a while
later, he was surprised to ﬁnd the scene exactly as he had left it. Krishna
was sitting in the middle, the gopalas were seated around him, and he was
holding the half-eaten ball of curd rice in his right hand and the staff in his
left, teasing and laughing with them, while the calves frisked around them
merrily. Brahma was thoroughly confused. He knew for sure that he had
just whisked away the calves and boys a while ago, a year ago to be exact,
according to human calculations, and here they were, all exactly as he had
seen them before! In compassion, the Lord gave him the eye of wisdom,
with which he saw that all the boys and calves were replicas of Lord Vishnu
—four-armed, holding the conch, discus, mace, and lotus, having the
Shrivatsa mark and the jewel Kaustubha on the chest, adorned with
vanamala, or a garland of wild ﬂowers, and many divine ornaments. And
what was more wondrous was that the inanimate things carried by the boys,
the ﬂutes, slings, sticks, and pots, had the same form. Many celestial beings,
including himself, were seen kneeling down and worshipping the Lord of
Vraja. According to the Bhagavad Gita, it is the experience of great
devotees to see everything as Vaasudeva (Krishna), and this was the
experience that Brahma had. His pride was thoroughly humbled, and he did
not know what to do.
At last, the Lord had pity on his predicament, and when he looked again,
Brahma saw that immeasurable consciousness, in the assumed form of a
cowherd boy, going about in search of his calves and companions with a
ball of rice in his hand. Thereupon, Brahma got down from his divine
vehicle, the swan, in haste and prostrated before the divine child and began
to extol him:
O Lord of Lords! Even I, who am the ﬁrstborn, having come out of your
own navel, cannot understand the mystery of your form, which is not
fashioned of material elements but of your own will, in order to bless
devotees. Who can calculate your attributes? Only the one who
surrenders himself, body, mind, and intellect to you can become eligible
for liberation. I am but a spark of your mighty ﬂame, and therefore it
behooves you to pardon my stupidity. You have demonstrated to me
today how the one, undifferentiated consciousness, as you were in the
beginning of cosmic time, came to be differentiated and changed into
numberless forms. What is this world but your jugglery? You unfold the
universe of your own free will, assuming the role of myself, Brahma, to
create, yourself, Vishnu, to uphold and sustain the creation, and Shiva
for its dissolution. O Almighty One! O Bhagavan! No one can say
anything deﬁnite as to where, how, when, and in what way your play as
the incarnate is going to take shape. Nor can anyone ﬁnd an explanation
for it. It is all part of your divine mystery. Without you there is no
world.
You are the truth. You are the self-manifest. You are the cause of all
causes, the indweller in all, the eternally blissful. He who is able to see
you, the one universal spirit as manifesting in all, certainly overcomes
this samsara, or transmigratory existence. Bondage and liberation are
not actual facts but mere names arising from ignorance of the truth
which is you alone. The atman has no other phase except that of truth,
consciousness, and bliss, just as in the sun there is neither day nor night
but only eternal effulgence. You are the indweller in all, yet people
search for you outside and thus can never ﬁnd you. But without your
grace, none can ever come to realize this truth. Pray, confer the boon of
bhakti, or devotion, on me so that I may be ever engaged in adoring
your lotus feet in every birth I take, whether as Brahma or man or
animal. How fortunate are these women and cows of Vraja, for in the
form of their sons and calves you sucked their milk for one whole year.
What is the good of being a god like me? I would deem it the greatest
good fortune if I could be born even as a blade of grass in this
enchanting forest of Vrindavana, where I would get a chance of being
bathed in the dust of your holy feet. O Krishna! You are the sun of the
Vrishni (Yadava) clan. You are the master of the universe and the Lord
of Vraja. To you, O Krishna, my homage for eternity.
So glorifying him, Brahma prostrated before the lotus feet of the blue boy
of Vrindavana, circled him three times, and departed to his own realm after
receiving Krishna’s blessings.
The gopalas and the calves who had been spirited away a year ago now
appeared, but since they had been in Brahma’s world, they felt that they had
been away only for a few moments. There is no memory that cannot be
effaced by the Lord’s maya.
The boys said to Krishna, “You’ve returned soon. You haven’t even
ﬁnished eating your ball of rice. Come and sit comfortably and eat.” They
concluded their interrupted picnic and returned home, and the boys
announced at Vraja that Krishna had killed the demon Aghasura, even
though the event had occurred a year ago.
Now that he had attained the grand old age of six, Krishna was promoted
to look after the cows instead of the calves, along with the older boys. He
went with them to distant parts of the forest that had been hitherto forbidden
to him. One day, a gopala named Shridama, a dear friend of his, said to
him, “Not far from here there is a palm grove that is forbidden to us, since
the wicked demon Dhenuka lives there. He has the form of a donkey and
kills all who go there. The fruits of those trees have a unique ﬂavor. Please
let us go and get a few fruits.” Nothing loath, Krishna said, “Come, let’s
go.”
He was ever ready to meet the most taxing demands of his friends, so
together with Balarama, he entered the forbidden forest. They looked at
each other, Balarama, the incarnation of Adishesha, and Krishna, the
avatara of Vishnu, and an unmistakable message passed between them.
With a laugh, Balarama took hold of the trees one by one and shook them
hard so that ripe, juicy fruits fell down in clusters. Hearing this sound, the
donkey demon came rushing out furiously and kicked Balarama in the
chest. He was about to kick him again when Balarama caught hold of him
by his hind legs and whirled him round and round with one hand and threw
his dead body onto the top of a palm tree. The tree crashed down, felling a
number of other trees. The boys came rushing into the forest, shouting
excitedly. They picked up the ripe fruits, and after eating their ﬁll, they
carried loads of fruit back home, singing merrily the while. The palm fruits,
when ripe, have a slightly intoxicating effect, and by the time they went
home, all of them were slightly inebriated. With the death of Dhenuka, the
forest was liberated. People could collect as much fruit as they liked, and
the cows, too, could graze without fear.
Another day, Krishna went to the banks of the Kalindi without his brother
Balarama. It was summer and the cows and the gopalas, who were thirsty,
drank deep from the water. All of them fell down in a swoon. At this spot,
the river water was extremely poisonous, for the multiheaded serpent
Kaliya lived there. So strong was the poison coming from him that nothing
could remain alive near the banks. The grass and trees around the place had
withered, and even the birds fell down dead when they ﬂew over this spot.
The forest appeared to have retreated in dread from its edge. Even the mist
and spray that arose from the waters had a noxious effect. As Krishna
observed the desolation, he decided that the time had come to get rid of
Kaliya and deliver the creatures of the forest from his baneful presence.
Seeing the inert and lifeless forms of the cows and his friends, the Lord
cast his loving glance at them and sprinkled on them the life-giving water
from his eyes. They rose up as if from a dream. Krishna comforted them
and told them not to be frightened, for he would kill the serpent. The only
living thing near the accursed place was a kadamba tree on which Garuda
(an eagle, the vehicle of Lord Vishnu) had sat. Without much ado, Krishna
climbed this tree and plunged into the swirling, poisoned waters below! His
friends watched breathlessly as he splashed about in the water creating a
huge whirlpool to attract the attention of the snake. Enraged at this strange
disturbance of his peace, Kaliya raised his cluster of heads to see who had
been so foolhardy as to jump in. When he saw Krishna, he ﬂew at him, bit
him all over, wound his coils around him, and dragged him down to the
bottom of the infested pool. Holding him thus in a tight embrace and darting
his tongue here and there like ﬂames all over his body, the snake gave him
bite after bite. But he found to his surprise that his teeth made no
impression on Krishna’s body. Instead, they broke and fell out.
Seeing their beloved playmate disappear with Kaliya to the bottom of the
pool, the gopalas were so terriﬁed that they started to cry and some fell
down in a swoon. At the same time, terrible omens were seen at Vraja.
Nanda and Yashoda were very unhappy to note these ill omens, and they
felt worse when they discovered that Balarama had not gone to the forest
that day with Krishna. They knew that it was the Lord’s inevitable custom
to leave his elder brother behind whenever he wanted to embark on some
new escapade. They collected the other gopas and gopis, and they all ran to
Vrindavana to search for Krishna. On reaching the banks of the Kalindi,
they found the unconscious boys and the cows lowing piteously and gazing
at the spot where Krishna had disappeared. Yashoda was only restrained
from jumping into the river by the other gopis. All of them except
Balarama, who alone knew the extent of Krishna’s prowess, were sorely
distressed. Seeing his mother and others in agony, Krishna released himself
from the snake’s hold and came up. He had been waiting for just such an
audience before starting his dance. The serpent darted after him, with hoods
spread menacingly, hissing and blowing poisonous fumes through his
nostrils. Fixing his red-hot eyes on him, the snake tried to mesmerize the
Lord and render him powerless. But Krishna merely looked amused at the
creature’s pranks and playfully swam round and round him in full sight of
the gopalas, so that the snake also started to revolve. Tiring of this
particular frolic, the Lord lightly sprang onto one hood of the snake and
began his macabre dance. When Kaliya brought up his tail to thrash him,
Krishna laughed and caught hold of it in his right hand. Holding the ﬂute in
his left, he played a divine melody, dancing the while on the snake’s many
hoods. When the head he danced on crushed, he would jump onto another.
The sky became ﬁlled with the celestials who had come to watch the show
and also to provide music for his wonderful dance! The sight was so
remarkable that the gopas and gopis forgot their fear and started to watch
the astonishing performance in wonder. The setting sun spotlighted this
strange scene of the black snake writhing in mortal agony with the jewel-
like child dancing merrily to the melodious strains of the ﬂute. His pink feet
twinkled like lotus petals blown in the wind, and his anklets tinkled as he
jumped from hood to hood. The red rays of the dying sun mingled with the
blood of the dying snake and made the river crimson. Kaliya’s eyes, which
had been gleaming like rubies at the beginning, had become dull and
cloudy. Battered and bruised in body and spirit, his pride thoroughly
humbled, he was a miserable wreck of his former glory. He began to think
of his Creator, the Lord of all beings, and mentally took refuge in him. At
this, the wives of Kaliya ranged themselves before Krishna and begged him
to spare the life of their husband. Unable to resist any plea, Krishna lightly
jumped off Kaliya’s hoods and swam to the shore. Kaliya followed him and,
fully repenting his deeds, came and bowed before him.
“O Master!” he said. “You created this universe with its inﬁnite
variations. We serpents are by birth ferocious and cruel. How can we
overcome our nature? You alone can help us in this. Our salvation and our
destruction are both in your hands.”
Krishna said, “Depart, O Kaliya. Go with all your kindred and subjects to
the island of Ramanaka in the middle of the ocean. You are banished
forever from this pool in the Kalindi, which you have poisoned and have
thus debarred other creatures from using.”
Then Kaliya, bruised and bleeding, answered, “Alas! O Lord! As I depart
to the island, that bird of yours, Garuda, who is my arch enemy, will surely
see me and destroy that life which you have spared.”
Then Krishna answered gently, “No, my friend. When Garuda sees my
footprint on your head, he will not dare to attack you, for he will know that
you have been blessed by me. So have no fear and depart in peace.” So
saying, he placed his hands on Kaliya’s heads and made him whole again.
Hearing this, Kaliya regained his spirits, and together with his retinue of
snakes, he prostrated to the Lord and departed to Ramanaka.
Thus, the dwellers of Vrindavana were freed from the terrible scourge of
the serpent Kaliya. Once more could they bathe in the reviving waters of the
Kalindi and drink their ﬁll. Once more did the withered trees and bushes
bloom and the ﬂowers dance, and the forest crept back to the banks of the
river.
The cowherds and the cows, hungry and tired though they were, did not
return to their settlement that night but decided to spend it on the banks of
the river, for Nanda was still concerned that the child Krishna might have
been affected by the poison. There was no way he could have known this.
People who are poisoned by snakes are generally thought to turn blue, but
this child was naturally of a blue color, so what were they to do? Another
belief they had was that one suffering from snakebite should fast and should
not be allowed to sleep, for he might never wake up. The only way to
ensure this was to stay in the forest in the night, for if they went back,
Krishna would surely beg, borrow, or steal something to eat. So they lit a
ﬁre and lay down around it. It was a calm, still, and sultry night. While
others slept, Nanda kept watch with Krishna. Suddenly, a strong wind
sprang up out of nowhere, and the cowherd chief saw to his horror that a
raging forest ﬁre, like a sheet of ﬂame, was advancing toward them with
alarming rapidity. Q uickly, he woke up the others. The gopas did not know
what to do, but the children had no such doubts. “O Krishna! Krishna!” they
cried. “Save us from this calamity as you have saved us so often before!”
Krishna smilingly reassured them and stepped forward in the path of
Agni, the god of ﬁre, and opening his small mouth, he quietly swallowed
that mighty ﬂame in three gulps. The men looked on in wonder at the one
who had saved them in this miraculous manner. Then Krishna turned to his
father and asked him, “Now are you satisﬁed, Father?”
Fire is supposed to be the greatest puriﬁer, capable of reducing even
poison to ashes, and the Lord wanted to reassure his father that even if he
had been poisoned, he would have been cleansed by the ﬁre he had
swallowed. Nanda gathered him up in his arms and embraced him. Who
was this strange child, he wondered, now wholly divine, now completely
human? What was he to believe? The only thing he knew was that he loved
his little son to the exclusion of everything else, and as the sage
Gargacharya had prophesied, this child had the power to save all those who
loved and depended on him.
Afterward, Krishna was taken in procession to the settlement surrounded
by his friends and relatives and the cattle, singing and rejoicing at his safe
return.
Now came the hot summer season, but while the Lord made his residence
at Vraja, the summer resembled spring. Due to the delightful sound of the
waterfalls, the chirping of the crickets, the luxuriant growth of grass, and
the perfume of the lotuses and water lilies, the inhabitants of Vrindavana
did not know the intense heat of the sun or the forest ﬁres that were
characteristic of summer.
One day, Krishna went to the forest as usual with his friends. They
regaled themselves with various sports, like wrestling, whirling, leaping,
pulling, and boxing. Sometimes they danced while Krishna played the ﬂute,
and sometimes he would dance while others provided the music and
clapped in rhythm. While they were thus playing under a huge banyan tree,
a demon called Pralamba arrived in the form of a gopala and joined the
group. Many others in various guises had come to kill the boy Krishna and
had failed. So Pralamba had the brilliant idea of taking on the form of a
gopala and thus lulling his suspicions. Krishna penetrated his disguise
immediately but, willing to give him the beneﬁt of the doubt, asked him to
join their game. After all, demon though he was, he had taken on a form
that was dear to the Lord. The group split into two teams with Krishna and
Balarama as the team leaders. Various games were arranged, at the end of
which the defeated person would have to carry his victorious counterpart on
his shoulders and walk to the banyan tree. Pralamba chose to be on
Krishna’s side, for he thought that he could easily defeat Balarama and then
deal with Krishna. At the end of the game, Krishna’s party was defeated,
and he took Shridama on his shoulders, while Pralamba took Balarama and
started walking. The Lord, who had killed ten demons with his baby hands,
allowed himself to be defeated by one, who grappled with love! He is ready
to carry any of his devotees who surrender to him, as he carried Shridama.
In the meantime, Pralamba set off at a brisk trot with Balarama, jubilant at
the success of his plan. Not stopping to look back or see what was
happening, and unmindful of Balarama’s cries to stop, he strode on past the
trees, determined to take him straight to Kamsa. By this time, he had taken
on his own huge, demonic form, so Balarama could not jump off. Balarama
turned around to look at Krishna, and from afar, the Lord made a sign to
him to crush the demon’s neck. Such was the power of the look that
Balarama was able to strangle Pralamba to death. The gopalas ran forward
to see the mighty form of the dead demon.
While the boys were discussing the wonders of the day, the cows had
wandered afar in search of grass. Concerned about their disappearance, the
boys searched far and wide and eventually traced them to a ﬁeld. Having
left the shade of the trees, the cows were dazed by the blinding heat of the
sun and did not know which way to turn. Hearing the beloved voices of
their masters, they were preparing to return, when the dry grass was swept
by a wave of ﬁre that soon turned into a mighty conﬂagration. Terriﬁed at
the sight of the advancing ﬂames, the gopalas and the cows cowered in fear
and thronged around Krishna.
“Do not panic,” said the quiet voice beside them. “J ust close your eyes
and hold me and no harm will befall you.” With absolute trust, they did as
they were told. No longer did they have the slightest fear, no longer did the
ﬁre have power to harm them, for that beloved voice had spoken, and they
knew that he would never fail them.
“Why are you standing like statues, closing your eyes?” Now it was
Krishna as a little boy speaking teasingly, and they opened their eyes and
found themselves back under the banyan tree where they had been playing.
They rubbed their eyes in surprise. Had they dreamed the terrible
happenings of a minute ago? Where was their guardian angel? Was he only
a little boy laughing and rolling in the grass, making faces, pulling their
hair, jumping and climbing trees like all little boys, or was he a
superhuman? They followed him in glee. Why bother to puzzle their heads
as to who or what he was? Let them enjoy the present while they could.
Now the rainy season was upon them. It was characterized by bright
circles around the sun and the moon, angry skies ﬁlled with gathering
clouds, and claps of thunder. The brilliance of the heavenly bodies was
dimmed by the dark thunderclouds and streaks of lightning. The land,
which had shrunk in the summer heat, now became ﬁlled with luxuriant
vegetation, and in the night, the ﬁreﬂies dominated the scene, for the stars
were hidden by the clouds. The frogs began their serenade, and all the little
streams, which had dried up, now gushed and gurgled with delight. The
whole forest took on a festive appearance. Even in this season, the children
would take the cows up the hill slope and into the woods, but when it
rained, they would take shelter under the tree or in caves, munching roots,
tubers, and fruits. The splendor of the season was enhanced by the presence
of the Lord.
Next came the autumn season, with its clear skies and mild breezes.
Ushered in by the lotus ﬂowers, the autumn season saw the turbid water of
the rivers and lakes becoming clear and limpid. Relieved of their rains, the
clouds now shone in white brilliance. At night, the clear skies revealed the
stars in all their clarity, and the autumn moon rose, large and red, on the
eastern horizon.
Thus, the golden days of childhood slipped by like gleaming beads
threaded on the rays of sunshine.
Not by the Vedas, or an austere life, or gifts to the poor,
or ritual offerings can I  be seen as you have seen me.
Only by love can people see me, know me, and come to me.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Venunadasharadaya Namaha!
7
T he E nchanting F lute
Barha peedam natavaravapu karnayo karnikaram,
Bibrath vasa kanakakapisham vayjayanthim cha malam
Randran venor adharasudhaya poorayan gopavrindai,
Vrindavanyam swapadaramanam pravishath geetha keerthi.
Extolled by the gopalas, Krishna entered the forest of Vrindavana,
which had become more beautiful because of his footprints. He was
dressed like a professional dancer, wearing a garment of golden
radiance and a garland of wild ﬂowers with peacock feathers in his
hair, and ear ornaments of karnikara seeds. Thus attired, he played
the ﬂute, ﬁlling its holes with the honey of his lips.
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
Though he had only reached the age of twelve, such was Krishna’s grace
and beauty that none could resist him. He is one who can arouse the desire
of the world;  how then could those poor gopis of Vrindavana resist him?
They did not even try. They had fondled him as a baby, kissed him as a
toddler, played with him as a child, and now he stood before them, the
epitome of all that a man, the true Purusha, should be. Like the Yamuna
ﬂowing toward her goal, the sea, so their hearts ﬂowed toward their Lord.
Their minds were untutored, their intellects poor, but their hearts were large
and full of love, and they burst and love ﬂowed toward him in a never-
ending stream. They followed him wherever he went. Each morning as he
left with the gopalas and the cows to the forest, the poor girls could hardly
contain themselves until the evening, when he returned. They could not
concentrate on their daily tasks;  they could not think of anything else but
him. They begrudged every minute he spent away from them and waited
only for the moment when they could see the tip of the peacock feather
adorning his hair in the far distance. Then they would forget their fatigue
and loneliness and rush toward him to welcome him and throng around him
until it was time for him to go home. During the day, they would picture
him standing beneath the spreading branches of a tree, perhaps leaning
slightly on the trunk with one leg crossed over the other in a dancer’s pose,
and playing a divine melody on the ﬂute placed close to his lips.
The melody was the call of the inﬁnite to the ﬁnite, and it awoke sublime
chords, even in the most sluggish hearts, and made them yearn for union
with the inﬁnite, which is the hidden desire of every heart. This yearning is
present in every human being, but sometimes we are too engrossed with the
world or too poor of understanding to know what it is. All we know is that
we are incomplete and inadequate as we are, but we are ignorant of what it
is that will make us complete. Sometimes a touch, a glance, or a word
spoken by some great sage is enough to loosen our bonds and open our
eyes, and then our heart leaps forward to meet its maker. Conﬁnement to
ﬁnitude is unbearable to the human being. We crave for nothing short of the
inﬁnite and the eternal. The whole of the ﬁnite world moves and progresses
toward this inﬁnity, and until it reaches there, it will remain unsatisﬁed. All
the baubles offered by the material world fail to satisfy because they are
themselves products of ﬁnitude and impermanent by nature.
As Krishna played his divine melody, the entire aspect of the forest
changed. The birds ﬂying in the air stopped to listen, the animals moved
closer to him, and even the Yamuna is said to have stopped her ﬂow, to
listen to the enchanting music. All moving things became immobilized, and
the immovables, like the stones and rocks, started to melt and ﬂow, such
was the bewitching power of his music. Even the rocks could not withstand
the eager, enticing call to the life divine, for he is Manamohana, the one
who arouses the desire of all minds.
“Awake! Awake! O sleeping soul!” he seemed to be saying. “Come to me,
your Lord. Why do you slumber when I am here, ready to play the dance of
eternal life with you? Wake up, O sluggish mind! Awake, O stony heart!
Come to me, the Divine Beloved. I will make you experience the meaning
of bliss!”
Without understanding this truth, it would be impossible to understand
how a child of twelve could so entice grown women that they forgot every
ﬁdelity for which Indian women are renowned and ran after him regardless
of consequences. Even the hearts of the wicked, hard as granite, melted at
the call of the divine ﬂute. What wonder, then, that the gopis who had
already given their minds to him as a baby should quiver and burn with an
overwhelming longing to have him as their husband? They were not sages,
they were not yogis, they knew nothing of philosophy or metaphysics. All
they knew was that he was a man, and they were women, and they longed,
with every ﬁber of their being, to have him as their lover. Because their
longing was invested in him, who was the beloved of the universe, though
carnal in nature at ﬁrst, it became transformed into something wonderful
and indescribable. As they sat in their huts listening to the melodious strains
of the ﬂute coming from the forest, they thought to themselves, “The
supreme fulﬁllment of having eyes is to be able to drink the beauty of his
face, as he stands playing the ﬂute in the forest. How fortunate are the trees,
ﬂowers, and the animals of this forest to be able to enjoy this bliss at close
quarters and to see his beguiling form in front of them, while we unlucky
ones are conﬁned to this cage of our houses and unable to go!
“What meritorious deed has this ﬂute done to have the privilege of
imbibing the pure honey of his lips without any restriction? Will that ﬂute
ever leave something for us? Will we ever be able to taste the nectar of his
lips one day? How lucky are the deer who nestle close to him and nudge
him as he plays. How lucky are the calves who stand pinned to the spot,
forgetting even to swallow the milk and eat the grass in their mouths, ﬁxing
their gaze on him as if they would drink him through their eyes! Surely the
birds of this forest must be sages in disguise, for see how they have perched
themselves on the branches above his head and are listening enthralled to
the strains of his melody! See the Yamuna, how she brings lotus ﬂowers as
offerings and places them at his feet. Even the clouds stop their wanderings
and send a mild spray of water over his head like a benediction. Surely the
Govardhana hill must be the luckiest of all, for it has the great privilege of
coming into contact with his feet and of offering him all the delicacies he
enjoys—the fruits, canes, tubers, and nuts.”
Thus constantly thinking of him, the gopis spent their days and waited
only for his arrival in the evening. Day by day their minds were more
closely bound to him, so that soon their state was that of meditating yogis.
At the beginning of the winter season, the young maidens decided to take
a forty-one day vow in connection with the worship of the goddess
Karthyayani to procure Krishna as their husband. Every day, these young
girls would wake up at three in the morning and go to the River Kalindi in
the bitter cold and take their bath at sunrise. There on the banks, they would
install an image of the goddess made of sand and worship her with sandal
paste, garlands, incense, lamps, fruits, and food offerings.
“O Devi Karthyayani! Thou mighty cosmic power and mistress of all!
Deign to give me the son of Nanda as my husband.” Repeating this mantra,
those maidens of Vraja worshipped the goddess for one full month,
regardless of bodily hardships, with their minds ﬁxed on Krishna, praying
that they might procure him as their husband. On the ﬁnal day of their vow,
they deposited their clothes on the riverbank as usual and sported joyously
in the water, singing songs about their Lord. It was still very early in the
morning, and the pearly mists of dawn were enshrouding the surrounding
forest. While they were thus playing happily in the river, they suddenly saw
the object of their desire standing on the banks, looking like the incarnation
of the god of love, smiling teasingly at them. They became aware of their
nakedness and covered their faces with their hands and looked shyly at him
through their ﬁngers.
Krishna smiled, for he realized that they were not completely pure. He
decided to help them to get rid of the last traces of their egos. They had lost
their sense of possessiveness regarding property, wealth, and relations, but
they still had to lose their body consciousness. This was the ﬁnal barrier,
keeping them from the fulﬁllment of their desires. The sense of shame
comes only when we are faced with another, and God is not another. He is
our very self. What is the need for modesty when we are faced with
ourselves? Unless this point is clearly understood, we cannot aspire to union
with God. In order to make them realize this, Krishna collected the clothes
lying on the banks in heaps and quickly climbed up the kadamba tree
nearby, saying to the maidens teasingly, “Come on, girls! Come and get
your clothes!”
Taken aback by these words of their hero, they shivered, neck deep in the
water, and begged him to return their clothes.
The Lord replied, “If you are indeed my handmaidens as you say, then do
as I tell you. Come out of water, one by one, and accept your clothes. Don’t
you know that it is a violation of a vow to bathe nude in the waters? Come
forward and prostrate before me, and thus you will be pardoned for this
transgression.”
Hearing this, the gopis threw off their egos like snakes shedding their
skins and walked forward one by one with hands outstretched and eyes
ﬁxed on him. In his eyes, they saw mirrored their own selves. One by one,
they got back their clothes and stood before him with folded palms and
bowed heads, waiting for his next command.
The Lord had tested them to the outer limit, and they passed with ease.
Their clothes were stolen, they were told that it was against rules to bathe
nude in the water, and they were forced to abandon their sense of shame and
go naked to receive their clothes. They were treated like puppets and made
to salute and prostrate. In spite of all this, they felt not the slightest
resentment. Totally divorced of ego, immersing their minds only in him, the
divine object of their passion, they were ﬁt to receive the ﬁnal benediction
of consorting with him.
The Lord, knowing what was in their minds, had gone there with the
express purpose of fulﬁlling their desires, and so he told them, “Having cast
off the last traces of your ego, you are now ready to receive me as your
husband, in the true meaning of the word. Passion directed toward me will
not end in sensual enjoyment. Human love is only a shadow of divine love.
Who would be happy to remain in the dark when she can enjoy the glory of
the sun? Who would be happy with mere fragrance, when she can have the
whole ﬂower? That is what I am offering you now. The ﬂower of divine
love, which will lead you to eternal bliss. Your names will go down in
history as the luckiest of all women. You are indeed blessed, for you have
discovered the secret of divine love, which will end in liberation from this
cycle of birth and death. Sensual love is the common experience of all
human beings, but bhakti, or divine love, leading to mukti, or liberation, is
experienced only by a few rare souls who have prayed and meditated for
many years and undertaken many austerities. But you girls, at the end of a
mere forty-one-day vow, have been blessed, for you are being offered that
which meditating yogis gain only after years of struggle. You are all
paragons of virtue. You may now return to Vraja. The object with which
you have observed this worship of the goddess will before long be fulﬁlled.
You will sport with me on the moonlit banks of the Yamuna in the autumn.”
Hearing these words of their beloved, their cup of happiness was full, and
slowly, with dragging footsteps and backward glances, they wended their
way home. The remainder of the time before the consummation of their
desire, the gopis spent in prayer and meditation so that when the time came,
they were perfect, pure, and shining. They had already attained the stage of
the avadhuta, or the sage who wanders about naked, for clothes symbolize
the attachment to false values beginning with the body. The gopis had
attained this state and were ﬁt to receive the Lord as their own.
One day while wandering in the woods with the gopalas, the Lord said to
them, “How noble are the trees. They live entirely for the sake of others.
They bear the wind, rain, heat, and sleet, but protect us from them. How
covetable is a birth like that, providing sustenance to all beings. They fulﬁll
the wants of all creatures with their leaves, ﬂowers, fruits, roots, and tubers.
People take shelter beneath them, and ﬁnally they give up their very lives to
provide man with fuel. Man’s life in this world is meaningful only to the
extent that his energies, wealth, and intelligence are used for the good of
others.” Thus to each according to his needs and his capacity, the Lord
taught these boys and girls who were devoted to him.
One day, the boys had ﬁnished eating all the food they had brought from
their homes and were still hungry, so they begged Krishna to procure some
food for them. To meet their demands as well as to bless the wives of
certain Brahmins who were performing ﬁre sacriﬁces (as enjoined in the
Vedas) in the neighborhood of the forest, Krishna asked the boys to go and
beg for some food from the Brahmins, for it was incumbent on them to feed
the hungry. So the boys ran off and begged for food from those learned
Brahmins, who were well versed in the Vedas. Pretending that they had not
heard, the learned ones continue to chant mantras, deaf to the needs of the
hungry boys outside, for they were conﬁrmed ritualists, blind to the inner
meaning behind the Vedic mantras. The disappointed boys returned with
tears in their eyes and Krishna comforted them.
“Never mind,” he said. “Such behavior is to be expected from those who
have only heads and no hearts. They may be full of learning, but their hearts
are barren, and they know not the meaning of love, out of which alone
kindness can ﬂow. But do not lose heart. Go inform their wives that I and
my brother are waiting here, and they will give you whatever you need, for
they have great love for me.”
So once again the boys went, and this time they were welcomed with
great love by those pious ladies, who had been hoping to have a glimpse of
the child Krishna from the time they heard of him. Though they were
reprimanded by their men, they rushed to meet him, carrying with them all
types of delicacies. There was one woman, however, who had been sternly
debarred from going and whose husband had locked her up, though her
heart was brimming with love for the Lord. So great was her longing to join
him that her spirit left its mortal cage and merged in him even before the
others reached him. It is said that the Lord had sent the boys on this
particular mission only in order to bless her.
The others ran to him, and when they saw him, blue complexioned,
wearing a golden-colored garment, and decorated with a garland of
wildﬂowers, with peacock feathers in his hair, twirling a lotus in one hand
and resting the other on the shoulder of a friend, they felt their hearts ﬁll
with joy. They prostrated before him and then laid the feast in front of him.
The Lord, knowing their devotion, accepted the offerings and told them to
return to their husbands. They were terriﬁed of going back and said, “There
is no chance of our husbands accepting us, since we have mortally offended
them by coming here. It behooves you to deal with us, for we have offered
ourselves body, mind, and spirit at your feet. We do not desire any other
way of life than your service in the future. Pray, do not forsake us.”
The Lord said, “You will not be blamed by your husbands, parents,
brothers, or sons for coming to me. Physical contact is not needed for the
growth and fulﬁllment of spiritual love. Keep your mind ﬁxed on me
always, and you will surely attain me before long.”
So the ladies returned with lagging steps and were surprised to ﬁnd that
their husbands had repented their folly and welcomed them back cordially.
They realized that it was only to bless them that the Lord of the universe
had come to them, to beg for some food. What irony he, whom they (their
husbands) were worshipping through the yajna (ﬁre sacriﬁce ceremony),
had himself come to them in the guise of a gopala, and they had sent him
away! But even now, though the realization came to them, they yet desisted
from going to him for fear of the king, Kamsa!
I n spring when the violent odor of musk is the scent of the tender
tamala sprout.
Hari here in the forest dwells in eager dance with the gopis.
FROM GI TA GOVI NDA BY J AYADEVA
No power is beyond the reach of the sage who has controlled his
mind, senses, nerve currents, and disposition and who concentrates
on me.
LORD KRISHNA IN UDDHAVA GITA,
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Govindaya Namaha!
8
Krishna L if ts the Mountain
Samprapthe sannithe kaale,
Nahi nahi rakshathi tukrannyakarane,
Bhaja Govindam Bhaja Govindam,
Govindam bhaja mooda mathe!
At the end of your life, your knowledge of grammar is not going to
save you, O foolish man! Therefore, adore the Supreme Lord,
Govinda (Krishna), for in that alone lies your salvation.
ADI SANKARACHARYA
Every year at the end of the summer season, the cowherds of Vrindavana
would offer a great sacriﬁce to Indra, the king of the gods and the god of
rain. This was to propitiate him so that he would send enough rain to make
the grass grow for their cattle to feed and not send too much, which would
make the Yamuna ﬂood its banks and destroy their settlement. Krishna
noticed the preparations and questioned his father about it.
“Every year we make a sacriﬁce to Indra to show our gratitude,” said
Nanda.
“What has he done for us for which we should be grateful?” queried the
Lord.
“Hush, child, do not speak like that. You have no respect for the gods.
Don’t you know that it’s Indra who gives us rains? We are cowherds. Our
wealth is derived from our cattle. How will our cows thrive without grass
and how will grass grow if there is no rain? If Indra is not propitiated, he
will not give us rain or he will give too much of it, and where will we be?
Without rain, all human efforts are of no use.”
Hearing this, Krishna replied, “Living beings are born according to their
karma and they die according to it also. Karma regulates their attainment of
enjoyments and their suffering, fears, and welfare. To creatures who are
thus subject to their karma, of what use is an Indra who cannot undo the
effects of those karmas? Therefore, it is best to do one’s duty as born of
one’s nature and thus honor karma. That is worship. The three gunas
(modes) of Prakriti—
sattva, rajas, and tamas—
 are the basis of the origin,
preservation, and dissolution of the universe. By the power of rajas, all
places get rain, from which all creatures get food. What has Indra got to do
with this? Being a forest tribe, we are always staying in the woods and on
hills like the Govardhana. Because of the hill, the rain clouds are stopped
and rain falls in Vrindavana, and it’s on the grassy slopes of this hill that our
cattle graze and grow sleek and fat and yield plenty of milk. So let a variety
of edibles be made and let food and gifts be given to all, including the
outcasts. Worship the cows with grass and the hill with sacriﬁcial offerings.
This is my view, O Father! This will make everyone happy—the cows, the
holy men, and myself. If it is acceptable to you, you may follow it.”
Nanda had been brought up in the tradition of paying respects to all the
ancient gods, such as Indra, Varuna, and others, but he had great faith in the
words of his son, who possessed extraordinary powers, as he well knew, so
he carried out all Krishna’s instructions. On the appointed day, under the
Lord’s supervision, plenty of butter, milk, and sweets, all his favorite
dishes, in fact, were prepared in vast quantities.
“Do not stint on anything, Father,” Krishna said teasingly. “When you
make an offering to God, it should be the very best that you can afford.” In
and through the prank, he was playing, He was also teaching them a
valuable lesson—to give honor where honor is due and also to give lavishly
when giving.
Carrying loads of food, the entire community trudged up the hillside.
There they lit the sacriﬁcial ﬁre and worshipped the holy men, the cows,
and the mountain itself. To generate faith in their minds, Krishna appeared
in a gigantic form, as the spirit of the mountain, and consumed large
quantities of the food offerings! No wonder he had asked them to prepare
the things he liked best. Then, in his own form as a gopala, he prostrated
before himself, and turning to others he asked them, “In all the years that
you have been giving offerings to Indra, has he ever come personally to
accept them?” They shook their heads sadly.
“Now see,” said the Lord playfully, “how Govardhana has accepted your
offerings in person!”
After this, they circumambulated the hill and then returned to Vraja in a
happy mood, after having partaken of the delicious feast.
But Indra was not to be dismissed so easily. He was not going to resign
his position and relinquish his accustomed offerings without a struggle. He
had listened to Krishna’s audacious words to his father and was determined
to teach him a lesson and punish the cowherds for their presumption in
withholding the sacriﬁce, which was his due. Thus, he assembled all his
weightiest rain clouds and hurled them down with such force that it rained
in Vrindavana as it had never rained before in their memory. Drops as large
as buckets came pelting down, hour after hour, day after day, without a
moment of intermission. The river began to overﬂow and the trees to be
washed away. It looked as if the little settlement with all the people and the
cattle would be swept away in a mighty ﬂood if something was not done
immediately. When they found that the onslaught refused to abate despite
their tardy prayers to an irate Indra, the terriﬁed cowherds ran to Krishna for
help. He calmed their fears and spoke reassuringly to them. “Fear not, I will
protect those who trust in me and have no recourse but me.”
Telling them to bring their cattle and all their worldly possessions with
them, he took them to the Govardhana hill, and then, with the greatest of
ease, he uprooted the mighty mountain with his tender, boyish hand and
held it aloft with one ﬁnger as easily as a child would sport with a
mushroom! Snugly ensconced beneath this mighty hill, with their cattle and
their belongings, the cowherds stayed safely for seven days and seven
nights, while the rains lashed down in fury. Thunder crashed and lightning
ﬂashed, the winds howled, and the waters poured down in an unending
deluge. It resembled the ﬂoodwaters at the end of time, for Indra was
determined to make them come out of their improvised shelter and beg for
mercy. Not even a giant could hold out for so long, thought he, and
certainly not a small child like Krishna. Very soon, he will get tired and put
down the hill, or it may even come down on him and crush the whole tribe
to pulp!
But nothing of the sort seemed to be happening. The gopas, with their
usual childlike capacity for living in the present, were having a wonderful
time in their improvised shelter. They built a ﬁre to keep themselves warm
and brought out their usual games and entertainments, holding wrestling
bouts and bullﬁghts, while the gopis danced and sang and gazed adoringly
at the Lord. He stood there holding the hill aloft with one hand, sometimes
playing the ﬂute with the other, sometimes tickling the necks of the calves
who came nuzzling up to him, sometimes joking and laughing with the
boys, and never for a moment showing the least sign of fatigue. It was a
great holiday for the whole community. They did not have to worry about
their usual routine chores and could enjoy the divine presence unhampered
by the pressing needs of their daily routine.
At last Indra’s stock of water seemed to have been exhausted. The drops
seemed to be losing their intensity and soon came to a full stop. Even the
wind and thunder seemed to have lost their volume and soon the last howl
and rumble died away in the distance. Seeing the sky clear of clouds,
Krishna led his entourage out into the open. The land had been ravaged by
the rain, but the sun was already coming out, and soon the waters would dry
up. The river had begun to subside, and the animals came creeping out of
their lairs. In the presence of all, the Lord reinstalled the mountain in its
original place. The inhabitants of Vraja could not contain their excitement
and joy, and all of them threw themselves at the Lord’s feet and hailed him
to the skies. Indra looked down from his heaven and knew to his fury that a
new star had appeared on the ﬁrmament that would eclipse him in the years
to come.
With pride thoroughly humbled, he decided to go to Krishna and beg his
pardon for not having recognized who he was, but he was ashamed to go by
himself. He requested the celestial cow, Surabhi, to accompany him.
Together, they approached Krishna and prostrated before him, while he
stood on the sodden sides of the Govardhana.
Indra said, “Salutations to you, O Krishna! You are the indweller in all
beings and the master of all devotees. I seek shelter at your feet, for you are
the Lord, teacher, and soul of all beings. Please forgive me!”
Next, Surabhi approached him. “You are the Lord of all that exists. May
you deign to be our Indra (king) in the future so that the holy and the
innocent may be protected. Allow me to perform the abhisheka (ceremonial
bath) for installing you as our king. Verily, you are born to lighten the
burden of Mother Earth.”
After having extolled him thus, Surabhi performed the abhisheka to him
with her milk. She was followed by Indra, who, with the assistance of the
sages, performed the ceremonial installation of the Lord as king of kings by
pouring over him the waters of the heavenly Ganga, brought in golden pots
by Indra’s royal white elephant, Airavata.
To the cries of “Hail Govinda! Hail Govinda!” they installed him as the
overlord of all jivas (embodied souls). This incarnation of the Lord had the
express purpose of saving all jivas from the wheel of existence, and thus it
was ﬁtting that he never again submitted to another coronation ceremony.
When Krishna was thus acclaimed as Lord of cows and jivas, it is said that
milk started to ﬂow from the udders of all cows and Earth was bathed with
their offerings. The rivers began to ﬂow with waters of various delicious
tastes, trees began to shed honey, and cereals to grow and mature without
any cultivation.
After this fantastic event, the gopas, who had not yet understood the
divinity of Krishna, were anxious to know more of the details of his birth.
They could not understand how Nanda and Yashoda, who were ordinary
cowherds like themselves, could produce such a prodigy. So they went to
Nanda and demanded an explanation. Nanda himself did not know much
except what sage Gargacharya had told him, and this he divulged to the
others.
“Hearken to me, O gopas!” he said. “I will tell you what Gargacharya has
told me about the birth and achievements of my son. ‘ Your son,’ he said,
‘ will help you to attain higher spiritual evolution. He will enable you to
surmount all difﬁculties and contribute to the happiness of your people and
your cattle. Those who love him will have no cause to fear enemies, for he
is equal to the Lord Narayana in respect of auspiciousness, fame, prowess,
and other great qualities.’ Therefore, O gopas, do not be surprised by these
exploits, revealing his divinity and majesty.”
The gopas who had personally witnessed these feats were delighted to
hear of Gargacharya’s predictions and started worshipping Krishna as
Narayana.
Once Nanda, after an ekadasi (eleventh day of the moon) fast, went to the
Yamuna on dvadasi day (twelfth day of the moon) very early in the morning
for a bath. The servants of Varuna, the god of waters, took him to their
master’s abode. The gopas ran and told Krishna that his father had
disappeared in the water, and Krishna entered the river and went to the
abode of Varuna to rescue his father. Varuna was one of the protectors of the
quarters. He was ﬁlled with joy to see the Lord and worshipped him with
various ingredients. Then Varuna loaded Nanda with numerous gifts and
sent both of them back to Vraja. Naturally, such a stupendous happening
could not be kept to himself. Nanda began to spread abroad the tale of his
fantastic experience in Varuna’s abode, and soon the news spread far and
wide, and the other gopas also thirsted for a similar experience. Knowing
their desire, Krishna took them to a pool called Brahmahradam, or the pool
of Brahma, and asked them to take a dip. There he showed them the vision
of Lord Vishnu lying on his serpent couch in the middle of the milky ocean,
surrounded by celestials and sages. What was more wonderful and thrilling
to the gopas was the fact that they recognized Vishnu to be none other than
the son of their chief! They were ﬁlled with bliss and lost their sense of
identity, merging in that ocean of bliss for a few exalted moments.
Thus, one by one, Krishna fulﬁlled the desires of all the inhabitants of
Vraja—his parents, his playmates, the gopalas, and his father’s friends, the
gopas. Now all that remained before he left them was to satisfy the desires
of the gopis.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Shyamasundaraya Namaha!
9
T he Divine L over
Sthreenanthu Lalitha Devi,
Purushananthu Raghava,
Thayor aikyam param Krishna,
Soundaryam kena varnyathe?
Who can describe the fascinating charm of Lord Krishna, who was
a unique combination of the unparalleled beauty of the goddess
Lalitha and the unmatched masculine grace of Sri Rama?
Noting the advent of the autumn season, with nights fragrant with the
perfume of jasmine ﬂowers, Krishna, assuming his Yogamaya, decided to
enact his long-promised play with the gopis. The full moon of the harvest
season rose large and red, painting the eastern horizon with vermilion. The
Yamuna rushed and gurgled with the rains, and the forest of Vrindavana
gleamed in the moonlight, ﬁlled with luxuriant vegetation and perfumed
with the scents of a thousand newly opened night ﬂowers. It was a night
that poets rave about and lovers dream of. It was a night calculated to strike
a spark of desire even in the heart of the sternest ascetic. What did it not do
to the gopis, whose hearts had already been churned by the god of love? As
the moon rose like a crimson disc on the horizon, Krishna placed his lips on
the magic ﬂute and poured out his divine call of love. The music drenched
the air of Vrindavana and ﬂowed into the hearts of the gopis, making them
forget everything else. Neither duty, nor honor, nor husband, nor child, nor
house did they have. Indeed, they forgot their very bodies. Leaving
everything, they ﬂew to their tryst with their lover, but because of their total
absorption in him, they did not even notice that many others were also
moving in the same direction. As soon as the ﬁrst plaintive call of his ﬂute
was heard, they left unﬁnished whatever work they had been engaged in
and ran to meet their lover. Some, who were engaged in milking cows, put
down their pails;  some kept the milk on the ﬁre and left it there;  some were
feeding their babies or giving food to their husbands. Leaving all those
chores half done, they hurried toward the forest, totally oblivious of their
neglected duties. Some were bathing or dressing, or applying makeup, but
even though they had put on only one earring and applied collyrium to only
one eye or were only half dressed, they left everything and ran as the musk
deer runs, maddened by the magic of the music of the ﬂute. Though their
men tried to stop them, they would not listen, for their minds were
completely absorbed in Krishna alone. Hair ﬂying, bells tinkling, breasts
thudding, heart pounding, they ran through the moon-drenched streets and
down the forest paths, lured by the strains of that divine melody. Some, who
were locked up in their rooms by their husbands, closed their eyes and
became absorbed in him and gave up their earthly bodies then and there.
The rest reached him panting and excited, with parted lips and heaving
breasts. Their whole attitude was wanton. They saw him only as their lover.
But one more test had to be passed before they achieved their desire. The
jiva in its quest for God has to overcome many obstacles. Only the intrepid,
who never give up come what may, achieve the desired union. The gopis
had already proved themselves devoid of ego. Now they had to prove
themselves ready to follow his path even if he himself spurned them. The
Lord spoke to them, “O fair ones! What is it that brings you here at this
time of the night? Have you come to admire the beauty of the forest, bright
with the silvery ray of the moon? In that case, you may return home, since
you have seen it. If, however, you have come here due to your attraction for
me, then it is my duty to remind you that the highest duty of a woman
consists in looking after the needs of her husband, even if he is ill
mannered, old, incurably ill, or poverty stricken. To have illicit relationships
with a lover is a bar to heaven and a stain on one’s reputation on Earth. By
thinking of me, and meditating on me, you will attain a high state of
spiritual love, which is far better than physical love. Go back to the security
of your homes, therefore, or else be forever branded as wanton women,
crazy with love for Krishna, the cowherd boy of Vrindavana. What can I
offer you that is comparable to the security of your own homes and
husbands? My way is fraught with danger. It ill beﬁts girls like you to be
seen here with a boy like me, at this time of the night.”
Only the soul that holds to God through all the trials and tribulations that
beset the path of devotion, that holds on through the hours of darkness when
we feel that God himself has forsaken us, is ﬁt to attain ultimate union with
him. Illicit love is always stronger than love that is accepted. That is why
the madhurya bhava, or the love of the lover for the sweetheart, is the
highest. Once love is consummated, it appears to lose half its charm. The
gopis were prepared to sacriﬁce everything, including their reputation, for
the sake of their lover. That is the type of love that God expects from us—a
love that scorns everything else but the Divine Beloved. When they heard
these harsh and cruel words from one from whom they had expected
nothing but love, they fell back like stricken deer, helpless and wounded.
“O Lord of our hearts!” they begged. “Do not desert us now, after we
have left everything and come to you. Our only fault is that we love you too
much! Of what use, O Lord, is the love of husband and children, productive
as it is of misery in the end? You have reminded us that the natural duty of a
woman consists in the service of husband, children, and relatives. But are
you not our closest relative and only husband, the dearest and most
cherished object of desire, for all jivas? Having stolen away our minds,
which used to ﬁnd delight in home life, and having put restraints on our
hands and feet, which used to occupy themselves with mundane household
tasks, why do you send us away now? The moment that you allowed us to
have contact with your lotus feet, from that moment it has become
impossible for us to look at any other man. O thou universal redeemer! Be
gracious to us, who have come to you, forsaking hearth and home and
husband. O Manamohana, charmer of minds, please place your cool,
fragrant, lotuslike palms on our fevered heads and assuage the heat within
our hearts.”
So saying, they sank to the ground in a state of despair. Then the Lord,
who had only been testing their constancy, bent down and lifted them up
one by one. With the tip of his yellow garment, he wiped away their tears
and kissed their pale lips till they reddened like roses in the sun. Then,
tenderly, he led them to the banks of the Yamuna where the setting was
romantic enough to enchant the heart of any woman, and played the game
of love with them. They spread the soft upper parts of their attire, one on
top of the other, and thus made a downy bed on which the Lord of their
hearts could relax. They sat around him, stroking his limbs, his hair, and his
face, fanning him with leaves, and nestling close to him, while the bolder
among them would even snatch a kiss. Krishna gazed at them, and ill clad
and poor as they were, in his eyes they were lovely beyond compare, for
they were lit with an inner radiance that had nothing to do with earthly
adornments. In all his checkered career to come, he was never to meet with
love like this again. Thus, for a short time, they were all immersed in bliss.
After some time, however, pride reared its ugly head and the thought
darted unbidden into their minds that they had procured this essence of
sweetness for their very own because of their cleverness and charm. The
sense of duality was reestablished, and they felt themselves to be separate
from him. As soon as they felt this, they found that he had indeed separated
from them! He had vanished, and with him the light that had bathed the
banks seemed also to have gone. They were alone in the middle of the night
on the suddenly unfriendly banks of the river, with the forest looming
behind, dark and menacing. Now that the Lord had gone, they realized the
utter futility of life without him. Life without the protective presence of
God is a dark and dreary forest infested with strange and terrifying specters.
There was no kind hand to help them over the stones, no strong arm to carry
them over streams and remove the thorns from their path. Hither and thither
they ran, falling and crying like demented persons. They addressed the trees
and creepers, “O Mallika! O Malathi! O Sandal! O Champaka! Have you
seen our beloved? O Tulsi! Have you seen Krishna? You are very dear to
him. He wears you close to his heart in his garland!”
Speaking thus, the gopis became so identiﬁed in their consciousness with
him that they began to enact all the various miracles of his childhood. The
creepers trailed their ﬂowers and tendrils across their faces as if to comfort
them. The trees sighed and bowed their heads to assuage their sorrow, but
though they searched everywhere, they could not ﬁnd him. After a while,
they realized that the one who was most fortunate among them, who was
still humble, was not in their midst. Her name was Radha, luckiest among
those gopis who were themselves luckier than ordinary mortals. Radha was
especially dear to Krishna, for it is said that she was the incarnation of his
Prakriti, or nature. The Lord’s Prakriti is simple, yet inexplicable. So also
was Radha—sweet and beguiling at times, willful and contrary at times, yet
withal, ﬁlled with adoration for her Lord alone, careless of everything but
the constant memory of the Lord, the one Purusha to whom she was
Prakriti.
As the gopis were thus searching frantically, they suddenly saw two sets
of footprints in the sand, highlighted by the moon. “Ah! Here I can see two
sets of footprints,” one gopi said. “Look where they have wandered off with
their arms entwined round each other’s necks. Let us follow.”
“O look!” said another. “Here he must have carried her in his arms across
this little stream, for there is only one set of footprints, which have sunk
deep, as if he were carrying some burden.”
“And look!” pointed another. “Here they sat down, and he made a jasmine
garland for her, for I can see the remains of it. O fortunate Radha! How I
wish I were you!”
So lamenting, they wandered on and suddenly came upon their object of
envy, Radha herself. Ever since she had heard the story of how Krishna
carried Shridama on his shoulders, she had cherished a secret wish to be
carried by him in a similar manner, and at that very spot, she had begged
him to carry her. He had knelt down, but just at that moment, the thought
occurred to her, how fortunate she was and how she would boast of her
conquest to the others. As soon as her ego asserted itself in this fashion, the
Lord disappeared, along with her pride, and she fell to the ground in a
swoon, unable to bear this separation from him even for a second. The other
gopis sprinkled water over her and whispered the magic mantra of
Krishna’s name, and she revived.
“Come, let us search for him,” they urged. But Radha could not move. “I
cannot,” she whispered. “I can only remain here and perish if he does not
come.”
They half carried her and went to the banks of the Yamuna, where they
had sported with him earlier, and sang a piteous song. In it is portrayed the
utter misery and darkness into which the soul of a seeker is plunged when it
ﬁnds itself separated from its maker. All seekers have experienced the
poignancy of this separation. For one blissful moment, they experience
union with God, and then, due to the limitations of the human body and the
pull of the ego, they are dragged back into the mundane level of existence,
and the searing pain they feel is indescribable. It is the pain of a limb that is
torn from its socket. The jiva thirsts to break the bonds of mortality and
attain immortality, but unfortunately, physical ties forged by its past karma
keep it in bondage until the time is ripe for its release.
“O dearest Lord!” they sang, “by your presence here, this forest of
Vrindavana has become the most beautiful place on Earth. Are you not the
ocean of kindness? Will you not grant us your vision? We live only for your
sake and have been searching for you in all directions.
“O Lord of supreme delight! Your eyes excel the charm of the inner petals
of these lotuses blooming in this clear autumnal lake. We are your unbought
slaves. Why are you so harsh to us? Why do you not reveal yourself to us?
“O eternal companion! You are not just the son of Yashoda, but the
immanent witness in all embodied beings, born to protect the world. Many a
time you have saved us from destruction by evil forces.
“Now why have you deserted us in this dark and fearsome forest? O dear
and lovely one! Deign to lay your blessed hand on our heads and confer
safety on us, who are ﬂeeing through the forest of samsara and have taken
refuge at your feet!
“O Supreme Lord of our hearts! Deign to place your feet, which danced
on the hoods of Kaliya, on our parched and aching bosoms and rid us of our
sorrows!
“O lotus-eyed one! We are ever ready to obey your commands and are
swooning because of our separation from you.
“O dearest one! Your loving glances and bewitching smiles are the most
auspicious themes of our meditation. The nectar of your words is extolled
by the sages and confers every prosperity on those who listen to them. Our
minds are deeply agitated by them.
“O hero of our hearts! When we think of your enchanting face smeared
with dust and your disheveled locks, when you return with the cows at
sundown, we are thrilled to the core. But the thought of your tender feet
being hurt by sharp stones and thorns while grazing the cows makes our
hearts break. During the day when you are away, a moment appears like an
age to us, who are denied your company, and when at dusk we see you
again, we curse the creator who made lashes for the eyes, thus forcing us to
blink and lose a precious second of your beatiﬁc vision.
“O hero of our hearts! Deign to ﬁll us with the enrapturing notes of your
music, which drop like ambrosia from the ﬂute kissed by your lips and
which send us to heights of spiritual ecstasy, making us oblivious to every
other allurement. We have rushed to you, overriding our husbands, children,
kinsmen, brothers, and relatives, captured by your divine music. Why have
you then abandoned us in the darkness of the night?
“O adorable one! Your manifestation is as much for the well-being of the
entire world as it is for the removal of the sorrows of the people of Vraja.
The only remedy for the ache that gnaws at our hearts is your company, so
please do be gracious to us, your handmaidens.
“O lovely one! We quiver in agony at the thought of your delicate feet
treading the thorny, stony paths of the forest. Even our bosoms are too hard
for you. Yet do please place them on us, and we will hold them with
extreme caution so as to avoid injury to them.”
Thus the gopis sang in their agony and intense longing to meet the Lord.
And suddenly, just as he had disappeared, Krishna reappeared in their midst
looking verily like Manmatha, the god of love.
“How could you think that I had left you?” he asked tenderly. “Not for
one moment were you out of my sight. Every step you took, I took one
beside you. Every time you faltered, I held you up. How else do you think
you have remained safe in this jungle, infested with wild creatures, at this
time of the night?”
The Lord is ever with those who have placed their lives in his hands. A
life once entrusted into his hands is safe forever. We may stumble on the
stones of misfortune, we may be pricked by the thorns of sorrow, but
unknown to us, his hand will be there to lift us up and wipe our tears.
Having seen him, they felt as if their life breath had returned, and they
clung to him. There on the banks of Yamuna, where the air was saturated
with the fragrance of jasmine, where the Kalindi had provided sandy dunes
for him to recline, Krishna, the master of all the universe who has his seat in
the hearts of meditating yogis, now sat on the seat made by those simple
maids of Vraja who worshipped him with all the usual offerings of love.
Fondling him and stroking his limbs, which were reposing on their laps,
they questioned him about the different types of love.
“Some love others according to how they are loved in return. Some love
even those who have no love for them. And others have no love for anyone,
neither for those who love them nor for those who are indifferent to them.
Please tell us, who are the most virtuous among these?”
The Lord said, “In the case of mutual love, the motive is only self-
interest. This is only a type of barter and cannot be called real love. This is
the type of love that is normally found among human lovers. Among those
who love others even if it is unrequited, there are two kinds—those who are
by nature kind and loving and those like parents, who love their children
without expecting reciprocation. As for the last type mentioned by you,
those who do not love anyone even if they are loved, these are of three
types—the atmaramas, or those who are ever absorbed in the self, for
whom everyone is included in the self;  the aptakamas, or those who have
no wants of any kind, and thus need have no dealings with anyone;  and the
brute man, who has no gratitude or love for anyone, even those who love
him. However, I do not belong to any of these categories. If I seem to be
keeping away from you, it is only to strengthen your desire so that you will
attain me faster. How can I not love you, who have left your home, family,
and position in the world for my sake? Even if I were to serve you for
countless divine years, I would not be able to repay you for this glorious act
of self-surrender, prompted by love alone, untainted by selﬁshness,
breaking asunder the powerful chain of attachment for home and worldly
life.”
The gopis’ pangs of separation were assuaged by the Lord’s words. He
then led them to perform the mystic dance known as the Rasalila, “the play
of love.” He took each of them separately to a special chamber in the
bushes and attended to her toilette with his own hands, arranging her hair,
applying her makeup, and adorning her with ornaments. He then arranged
them in a wide circle in which each gopi danced with one Krishna, and he
himself stood in the middle supplying the music for the dance. Like a
sapphire between two beads, Krishna’s blue form shone between two gopis!
Heavenly instruments joined with the ﬂute, and ﬂowers were rained on the
heads of these fortunate damsels by the gods. The tinkling sound of their
bangles, bells, and anklets mingled with the music and ﬁlled the air. The
gopis were not aware of the fact that there were so many Krishnas! Each
one felt that she was alone with her beloved, and forgetting all modesty, she
clung to him and caressed him. He, in turn, embraced her and transported
her to a state of bliss never before attained by anyone, for it was no ordinary
physical union that they experienced, but the ultimate union of the jivatma
with the Paramatma, the realization of the great Upanishadic mantra Tat
Twam Asi (That thou art), which is attained by striving yogis after intense
and prolonged austerities. This experience was granted to those poor
unlettered gopis of Vrindavana, because they possessed one great quality,
which transﬁgured them, the alchemy of love, which transformed them and
made them into creatures of light and glory. Such love transcends the
boundaries of time and space and soars above both physical and mental
planes. The only bond that can bind the inﬁnite to the ﬁnite is the bond of
love, which sweeps away man-made barriers and soars into the unknown.
The gopis had no sense of separation. Like the Ganga losing itself in the
ocean, their souls were submerged in the ocean of bliss that was Krishna.
Though their love was carnal in nature at ﬁrst, yet through contact with him
who was the Supreme Being, it was transformed from the dross of physical
passion to the effulgence of a divine union. This particular incarnation of
the Lord was only to bestow salvation on all jivas in whatever way they
approached him—through love, fear, anger, affection, or devotion. Later on,
in the Bhagavad Gita, he was to tell Arjuna, “In whatsoever way people
approach me, in that same guise will I go to them, for people approach me
in many ways.”
If he was capable of giving liberation even to a Putana and an Aghasura,
who came to kill him, why would he not grant the same status to the gopis,
whose only fault was that they loved him too much. They knew that they
could never hope to have him as their husband, so they longed to have him
as their lover, and he went to them in that guise. Since their love was not
lodged in some limited human being but ﬁxed on him who is the eternal
Purusha, it was sublimated, and they achieved that state of direct union with
him that even striving yogis attain with the greatest difﬁculty. Therefore, the
Rasalila is also known as Brahmaratra, or the night of Brahman.
As the night advanced, the music faded, and only the soft sound of their
ankle bells could be heard. Slowly, even this died away as they became
tired of dancing. Their eyes started to close like half-opened buds, and their
heads dropped on their beloved’s shoulder. They were unaware that their
garlands and ornaments had slipped away, and they were incapable of
attending to their loosened tresses and garments. He wiped their perspiring
faces tenderly with his own cooling hands, his arms encircled their slender
waists, and they drank the nectar of his lips for which they had been
longing. Some clung around the neck of their own particular Krishna, others
kissed his hands, others his lips, and others stole the half-eaten betel nuts
from his mouth. Their locks were falling in abandon, their clothes were
loose, their blouses open, but they knew not, nor cared, for they were quite
unconscious of their bodies. He was their husband, their lover, their Lord.
Nearer to them than friend or relative, nearer to them than father or mother,
dearer to them than life itself. He was ﬂesh of their ﬂesh and soul of their
soul. They were submerged in a state of unity in which all is one and there
is no other.
Thus, on many a moonlit night like this did they sport with that inﬁnite
one, who had taken on a ﬁnite form in order to delight the world. Though he
was the all knower who was completely detached from all things and ever
poised in the bliss of the self, yet he invested everything he did with the zest
and enthusiasm of a child. He was the cosmic beloved, yet he made each
gopi feel that he was her own special lover. Each full moon night as they
ran to him in disarray leaving all their unﬁnished work behind at the call of
his magic ﬂute, he would take them to a special bower prepared for each
one individually and repair her toilette with his own hands. He would comb
her hair, put collyrium in her eyes and the sacred red dot on her forehead,
anoint her with sweet-smelling unguents, and adorn her tresses with jasmine
garlands. This he did not to one but to all the gopis. Then he would lead
them to the banks of the Yamuna and dance the Rasa. After that, they would
sport in the river to shake off their fatigue before returning to their homes.
Toward the early hours of the morning, persuaded by their beloved, the
gopis would return to their homes unwillingly. Owing to the Lord’s
mysterious power, the gopas did not miss their women and felt no ill will
toward him. In fact, they worshipped him as God.
The Lord assumes a human body and sports in ways that are suitable to
fulﬁll his purpose for the blessing of all humanity and to draw toward
himself even those who are not spiritually inclined. Sexual passion is
normally considered a hindrance to spiritual life, but since their minds were
attracted to him, who was the repository of holiness and purity, the gopis
became paragons of virtue and devotion, extolled even by the sages. In the
Srimad Bhagavatam, it is said that all those who read this particular episode
in the life of the Lord will be able to subdue their own sexual craving and
direct it toward him, the Supreme Beloved.
O friend, I  cannot tell you
whether he was far or near
Real or a dream
Like a vein of lightning
As I  chained the dark one,
I  felt a river ﬂooding my heart
Like a shining moon
I  devoured that liq uid face
I  felt stars shooting around me.
SONGS OF VIDYAPATHI
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Vanamaline Namaha!
1 0
T he L ord of  Vraja
Darshaneeyatilako, vanamaladivyaganda tulasi madhumatte,
Alikularailalagugeetamabhishtamadriyan yarhi
andhitavenu,
Sarasi sarasahamsavihangasrarugeetahrithachetam ethya,
Harimupasatha theyathachittha hantha meelithadrisho
drithamouna!
When Krishna, adorned with the attractive tilaka, begins to respond
with his ﬂute to the loud humming of the bees that are drawn to him
by the fragrance of the tulsi leaves in his vananmala, then do the
waterbirds like the swans and cranes gather, attracted by his music,
and stand beside him like self-controlled sages, silent, with eyes
closed, as if in contemplation of the Divine.
During the day, when Krishna went to the forest to tend the cattle with his
playmates, the gopis spent their time imagining his activities in the forest.
Their imagination ran riot when they thought of all the things he would be
doing there. They lived for that moment at dusk when he would return in a
cloud of dust, raised by the hooves of the cattle, his hair and garlands
covered with dust, joking and playing pranks with the gopalas and
delighting all with his loving glances.
One day Krishna told the gopis that the sage Durvasa had come to the
opposite bank of the Yamuna and that they should all go and worship him
and take him some offerings. The gopis were ever willing to do his bidding,
and they prepared many delicacies. They went to the Yamuna, only to ﬁnd
that the river was in spate, and they could not cross. They returned forlornly
and told Krishna about their predicament.
The Lord smilingly advised them to try again. “Go to the Yamuna and tell
her, ‘ O Yamuna! If you know Krishna to be ever ﬁrm in his vow of
celibacy, then please part and make way for us to go to the other side.’”
The gopis were startled at this statement, for their own experience told
them that this was not true. However, they did as they were bidden and lo!
the waters parted and they were able to cross over with the greatest of ease.
They approached sage Durvasa, worshipped him, and placed all the baskets
of delicacies before him. The sage was noted for his abstemious eating
habits, yet he polished off the vast quantities of food brought for him by the
gopis and blessed them. On their return, they found that the Yamuna had
closed her path, and they could not cross over. They returned to the sage
and explained their difﬁculty. He was naturally curious to know how they
had managed to come to him. They told him of the miraculous way in
which they had crossed, and with a smile, the sage said, “Go tell the
Yamuna, ‘ O Yamuna! If you know sage Durvasa to be the most abstemious
of eaters, then you should part and make way for us to cross over.’”
The gopis were amazed. How could a sage like him make such a false
statement when he had just swallowed vast quantities of food in front of
their very eyes? Yet, since he was also known for his temper, they dared not
remonstrate but went meekly and did as they were bidden. Great was their
amazement when the Yamuna parted and allowed them to cross. At this
behavior on the part of the river, they could not contain their curiosity and
ran to their mentor and asked him the reason for these inexplicable
occurrences. The Lord gave them a discourse on the law of karma.
An action binds us only when we feel that we are the doer. The
consequence of such an act is always bondage. However, when an act is
done by a realized soul or by the Lord himself, it is done with no trace of
ego and no involvement of the mind. It is a completely free and natural act,
and thus it has no consequences. It goes beyond the law of karma. The
Lord’s actions are totally devoid of personal motivation. He is a free agent,
ever immersed in the bliss of Brahman, totally detached from everything,
and thus, even though he may consort with a thousand women, yet he is
ever a nitya brahmachari, or perfect celibate. So also, the sage Durvasa had
no attraction or repulsion for the food placed before him. He ate only to
please the gopis and not because he was in any way interested in the food.
Had they brought nothing for him, he would still have been equally happy,
for his happiness was derived not from the external object, but from his
inner blissful self. Ever immersed in the self, he knew nothing of either
hunger or thirst. Thus, he had every right to be called an abstemious eater.
In this delightful way did the Lord teach the gopis the secret of action
without bondage to the wheel of karma.
Once, during a festive season, the gopas went to a place of pilgrimage
known as Ambikavana. After bathing in the river, they offered worship to
Lord Shiva and his consort Parvathi. They spent the night there on the
banks of the river, and while they slept, a python caught hold of Nanda’s
leg. The gopas woke up, on hearing his screams, and tried to drive it off
with ﬁrebrands, but it would not let go. They went and called Krishna, who
touched the snake with his foot. Freed from its curse by the contact with his
holy foot, the serpent assumed its original form of a celestial being. He
prostrated to the Lord, thanked him for having released him from his curse,
and returned to his abode.
Another day, when Krishna and Balarama were roaming in the woods
with the gopis, a servant of Kubera, the lord of wealth, happened to pass
that way, and seeing the gopis, he abducted them. The two brothers chased
him and rescued the gopis.
Now Kamsa sent to Gokula a demon called Arishta, who had the form of
an ox. Bellowing wildly, with upraised tail and reddened eyes, he charged
down the small lanes, causing havoc among people and cattle. Seeing the
confusion caused by the beast, the Lord barred his way and provoked him
by clapping his hands on his shoulders in the manner of bullﬁghters. The
enraged bull charged at him with lowered horns, ﬁxing him with his mean
and bloodshot eyes. Krishna caught hold of him by his horns and gave him
a mighty shove that threw him back ten feet. The maddened bull staggered
to his feet and charged once more. Again the Lord caught hold of him by
his cruel and pointed horns and threw him on the ground. Pinning him
down with his foot, he pulled out his horns and killed him.
After this feat, the sage Narada went once again to the court of Kamsa,
for he considered it high time that the Lord moved out of Vraja to enact
further scenes of his enthralling life, in different arenas. He proceeded to
enlighten Kamsa about the identity of Krishna and Balarama.
“Know, O Kamsa, that the eighth child of Devaki who was shown to you
was actually the daughter of Yashoda, the wife of the chieftain Nanda, who
resides at Gokula. She was exchanged with Devaki’s son, Krishna, who
now lives in Vraja, as the son of Nanda. Balarama, his brother, is also
Vasudeva’s son, by his wife Rohini, and lives in Nanda’s house. They are
the ones who have killed all the demons you have sent to destroy Krishna.”
Hearing this, Kamsa became furious with rage and took up his sword to
kill Vasudeva. He was restrained by Narada, but he chained Vasudeva and
Devaki once again in his dungeon. Then he called the demon Kesi and
commissioned him to go kill the boys.
Kesi took on the form of a huge horse and arrived in Gokula, snorting and
furrowing the earth with his sharp hooves. Seeing Krishna approaching him
fearlessly, the demon charged at him with his mouth wide open as if to
swallow him. Evading his upraised hooves, Krishna caught hold of his legs,
whirled him round and ﬂung him a hundred yards away. But Kesi was not
beaten yet. He struggled to his feet and charged once again with his teeth
bared menacingly and foam ﬂecking his mouth. Krishna thrust his bare arm
into the horse’s open mouth, and when the demon tried to bite off his arm,
his teeth fell out! The Lord’s arm now swelled in size and choked him to
death.
Krishna proceeded on his interrupted journey with the gopalas to graze
the cows. There on the hill slope they played at ranchers and cattle thieves.
A demon called Vyoma came there in the form of a gopa. He stole many of
the boys who were playing the parts of the cattle and shut them up in a
remote cave. As he was coming back to steal more, Krishna caught hold of
him and killed him and released the gopalas. When they returned to Vraja
that evening, they described the events of their day—how their make-
believe game had turned into a thrilling adventure.
With the killing of Kesi, Kamsa became desperate. He decided that the
only way to kill the boys was to bring them to Mathura, where he could
personally supervise their end. He summoned the famous wrestlers
Mushtika and Chanura and told them that he would arrange a wrestling
match for them in which they would have to kill their opponents—the boys
Krishna and Balarama. He also told the chief of his elephant stable to
station the mighty mammoth, Kuvalayapida, at the entrance to the wrestling
amphitheater to kill the boys.
“Let the Festival of the Great Bow of Lord Shiva be ceremonially
inaugurated on the thirteenth lunar day, which is sacred to Shiva, and let all
the inhabitants of the outlying villages be invited to participate in the
festivities!” This was Kamsa’s proclamation. He realized that the only way
to entice the boys to Mathura was to send someone acceptable to the gopas
to invite and escort them.
So he called Vasudeva’s cousin Akrura, who was a great devotee of
Vishnu, and spoke to him as follows, “Dear Akrura, you must do something
for me that only a close friend can do. I do not ﬁnd anyone among the
Bhojas to match you in sincerity and ability. Please go to the cowherd
village, Gokula, where Krishna and Balarama, the sons of Vasudeva, are
residing with Nanda. Invite them for the Festival of the Bow and escort
them here in the chariot, without any delay. You may also invite the rest of
the gopas for the festivities so that they will not get suspicious.”
Akrura was a great devotee. Hearing of Krishna’s greatness, he had been
longing for a glimpse of him, but since he was in Kamsa’s service, he had
not dared to make the fourteen-mile journey to see him. He was overjoyed
to ﬁnd that of all the people that Kamsa could have sent, he had chosen him
to be the one to invite the boys and escort them to Mathura. Mysterious are
the ways of the Lord. He makes use of even his so-called enemies to serve
the interests of his devotees. But at the same time, Akrura’s heart trembled
with fear when he realized that he was only a tempting bait to lure the
children to their death at the arena, for he had heard the orders, given by the
king. He was in a panic of apprehension whether the Lord would realize his
predicament and forgive him. Would he understand that he was an innocent
instrument and had nothing to do with the plot?
Akrura spent the night in great expectation and started for Vraja the next
morning in a lovely, jeweled chariot calculated to entice the rustic minds of
the boys. After traveling for some time, his joy at being given the chance of
seeing the Lord surpassed his despair at the purpose of his mission, and he
allowed his mind to revel and wander freely over the delights he would
share with the Lord when he met him.
“The fact that I have seen so many auspicious sights at dawn indicates
that today I shall see him, who is the joy giver and enlightener of the
universe, the refuge and preceptor of all holy men, the most auspicious
object for the eyes. As soon as I see him, I shall jump down and prostrate
before him. He will place his blessed hands on my head and cast his smiling
look at me, and I shall attain to supreme bliss. And if perchance he
embraces me with his powerful arms, my bondage of karma will surely be
broken. To none is he partial, nor is anyone his object of enmity or
indifference, but it is an undoubted fact that he blesses his devotees in a
manner that is appropriate to their needs, just as the heavenly wish-yielding
tree the Kalpaka gives to each person according to his requirements.”
Ruminating in this fashion, Akrura quite forgot where he was going and
allowed the horses to go as they liked. At last, by the time he came to the
outskirts of Vrindavana, twilight had fallen. He now began to notice the
footprints of the Lord. J umping out of the chariot in excitement, he
exclaimed, “Here is the dust of my Lord’s feet!” With these words, he took
up a handful of the dust and placed it reverently on his head. Tears coursed
down his cheeks, and he burst into raptures over the forest of Vrindavana.
“Ah, lucky Vrindavana! O fortunate trees! Who can extol your virtues?
His divine feet have played on this ground, his yellow garments have been
caught on these thorns, his body has been stroked by these leaves. This
divine breeze has rufﬂed his curls and carries with it the perfume of his
breath.”
So saying, Akrura jumped out of the chariot and threw himself on the
sanctiﬁed ground of Vrindavana, breathed deeply of its intoxicating air, and
clasped the trees and vines to his chest in a paroxysm of rapture. Then,
remounting his chariot and proceeding a little farther into the village, he
saw from a distance the Lord of his heart standing in the courtyard looking
even more beautiful than his imagination had pictured him. Krishna was
waiting outside, as if to see the milking of the cows, but actually to get the
ﬁrst glimpse of his devotee, for his longing to see Akrura was equal to the
latter’s desire to see him. He had just had his bath after returning from the
forest and wore his usual yellow garment. His hair was bunched on top of
his head with peacock feathers stuck in the middle and a garland of white
ﬂowers surrounding it. The eyes in the feathers and his own eyes were wide
open, in eager anticipation to meet his devotee, and his lips were parted in a
delightful half smile, overﬂowing with love. On seeing him, Akrura jumped
out of the chariot and threw himself at Krishna’s feet. Immediately, Krishna
lifted him up with both hands, embraced him, and led him into the house.
Akrura was too overwhelmed to be able to speak. He could only close his
eyes and hold Krishna close to him as if he could not bear to let him go. He
felt as if he were drowning in a sea of nectar. Gentle hands were stroking
him, and a lilting voice was enquiring tenderly after his welfare. Slowly his
senses returned, but like the waker who knew the dream to be false, Akrura
realized that this life was but a dream and the only reality was this bundle of
bliss he held in his arms.
Nanda and Yashoda welcomed him, and all the gopas crowded around
him to hear the news. The whole night was spent in discussing Kamsa’s
commands and whether the boys should accept this invitation to
destruction. Krishna laughed at his father’s fears and told him that the
king’s commands had to be obeyed;  if not, Akrura would surely get into
trouble if he returned empty-handed.
Reluctantly, Nanda agreed, though his heart was ﬁlled with foreboding.
He ordered the gopas to collect milk, milk products, and other gifts to be
presented to the king and to harness their carts for the journey. The
announcement was broadcast all over the settlement that all those who
wished to take part in the Festival of the Bow were welcome to accompany
him to Mathura the next morning.
The gopis, to whom the Lord was their very life breath, were
overwhelmed with grief to hear that someone had come to take him away to
the city. The actual meaning of the word akrura is “not cruel,” but to the
gopis he appeared to be the personiﬁcation of cruelty.
“How did such a cruel man get such an unsuitable name?” they lamented.
“He has come to wrench our beloved from our arms. O cruel fate, that
separates us before we have assuaged our thirst! How are we to endure the
excruciating sorrow of separation from him even for a day? The wishes of
the women of Mathura are soon to be fulﬁlled for tomorrow the Lord of
Gokula will be entering their city, and they will be able to imbibe from the
cup of his charming eyes, his intoxicating glances. Surely he will forget his
rustic playmates and be charmed by the beauties of the city. What shall we
do, O friends? Shall we throw ourselves in front of the chariot so that he
will have to ride over us if he wants to go?”
“No, no!” said another. “That would be most inauspicious. It’s bad luck to
put obstacles in front of a traveler. He is sure to return soon as soon as the
festival is over.”
Thus, the gopis lamented, imagining the pangs of their prospective
separation from their beloved. The night passed in this fashion, and with the
break of the dawn, the gopis began to cry out aloud, “O Govinda! O
Damodara! O Madhava!”
Knowing the turbulent state of their minds, Krishna sent Shridama to
comfort them. They were not satisﬁed with his words, but they were too shy
to go in front of the stranger and accost him themselves. Little did they
realize that this parting was to last for the rest of their lives.
The next morning the entire community was plunged in grief. The gopis
thronged the lanes waiting to have a last glimpse of him who was the
custodian of their hearts. With piteous, tear-ﬁlled eyes, they gazed at him as
he got into the chariot with Akrura and Balarama. Nanda and the other
gopas and gopalas followed in ox-drawn carts, laden with pots of curd and
other objects, for presentation to the king. As he passed them, each of the
gopis felt a message pass from his eyes to hers, and this ﬁlled them with
hope and made them forget the actual moment of parting. Even from afar,
they felt his eyes brimming with love, caressing them in waves of kindness.
They remained where they were, motionless like pictures drawn on canvas,
watching the chariot until it disappeared from sight and only the little ﬂag
on top of the chariot was seen, merrily waving to them, as if by order of
their beloved. Soon, even that disappeared, and only a cloud of dust
remained. Then even that vanished, and they were left bereft, feeling as if
their hearts had been torn from their bodies. At last, they returned to their
empty homes to spend the rest of their lives singing about his glories with
their minds absorbed in contemplation of his divine form until they merged
into him at the end of their earthly sojourn.
Thus did Krishna leave Gokula, followed by the carts of the gopalas and
the hearts of the gopis. One phase of his life was over. Never would he
return to Vraja as a cowherd boy to enjoy the simple pleasures of rural life.
A new chapter was opening, in which he would have to play the role of
kingmaker. There is no episode in his life as poignant as his stay with the
gopalas of Vrindavana. As entrancing as the melodious call of his ﬂute, this
chapter in his life as “the Blue Boy of Vrindavana” is one that has thrilled
the hearts of his devotees to this very age. Some of the greatest poems and
paintings of the culture of Bharatavarsha have been inspired by this period
of his life.
O dearest Lord, by thy incarnation, the county of Vraja has
surpassed all other places. I t has become abundantly charming for
the goddess Lakshmi has made it her permanent residence.
Graciously take notice of us, thy own people who live only for thy
sake and who are searching for thee in all directions. Do grant us
thy beatiﬁc vision.
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
The yogi sees himself in the heart of all beings and sees all beings
in his own heart.
This is the vision of the yogi in harmony—
the vision of unity.
“ And when he sees me in all and sees me in whatever he sees,
wherever he may live, in truth he lives in me alone.”
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Kamalanathaya Namaha!
PART TWO
R aj a-Lila—The R o y al Game
 
Aum Bharthaya Namaha!
The R o y al Game
Hail to Thee!
O King of kings and Lord of lords!
Wielder of the mighty mace—
the Kaumodaki, the sword—
Nandaka,
F lourishing aloft the wheel—
Sudarshana, the bow—
Sarnga.
Power immense and majesty supreme!
I s this a game or just a dream?
Overwhelmed am I  by thy might and glory,
E nthralled am I  by thy sermon holy!
Sole friend and lover of all humankind!
With bonds of love tie thou my mind!
Oh Lord of lords and King of kings!
Thy sport to all enlightenment brings.
All hail to Thee, Thou knight divine!
Thy royal game is sport sublime!
Aum Vaasudevaya Namaha!
1 1
T he Prophecy F ulﬁlled
Vasudeva sutam devam,
Kamsa Chanura mardanam,
Devaki paramanandam
Krishnam vande jagat gurum.
Hail to thee, Lord Krishna, the preceptor of the universe, son of
Vasudeva, the supreme bliss of Devaki, and the destroyer of Kamsa
and Chanoora.
Akrura drove the chariot fast and at noon reached the banks of Yamuna,
where he alighted to perform his afternoon worship. The boys rested in the
chariot while Akrura went for his ablutions. The chariot had outdistanced
the carts of the gopas, so they had plenty of time at their disposal. As
Akrura submerged in the water and began repeating the Gayatri mantra to
the sun god, he had a vision of Lord Vishnu reclining on his serpent couch,
Adishesha, and he saw that Vishnu was none other than Krishna and Shesha
was Balarama. All the sages and celestials were standing around and
extolling him. Akrura also saluted him with folded palms, “Salutations to
you who are pure consciousness, who are the source of consciousness
everywhere, who are the inﬁnite power of Brahman, controlling the three
factors of time, karma, and nature that determine the destiny of man.
Pitifully weak willed as I am, I ﬁnd it impossible to control my mind,
plagued by desires, drawn hither and thither by the strong-willed senses.
Therefore do I resign myself at your feet. It is only through your grace that I
am able to do so.”
The vision vanished, and Akrura came out of the water and went back to
the chariot. Krishna asked him mischievously, “What is it, Uncle? You seem
to have come across something wonderful, either in the water or on the land
or in the sky. What could it be?”
Akrura answered, “Whatever phenomenon that exists on land or water or
sky exists only in you and because of you, the all-inclusive existence. What
is it that cannot be achieved by one who is blessed by you, yet what is it that
a devotee of yours can desire, which he considers greater than your blessed
vision? When you are present before me, you, in whom all that is wonderful
subsists, what other wonder can I possibly see?”
Saying thus, Akrura drove the chariot toward the city. When they reached
the suburbs, they found that the party headed by Nanda had arrived and was
waiting in a garden for their arrival. Krishna alighted and told Akrura to go
ahead. Akrura begged him to accompany him to his house with his friends,
but Krishna declined the offer and promised to visit him after his encounter
with Kamsa. Akrura, though he felt sad, complied with the Lord’s
commands and proceeded to the palace to give Kamsa the news of the
fulﬁllment of his mission.
The next day Krishna, accompanied by Balarama and the other gopas,
proceeded in a leisurely manner into the capital of the Bhojas, City of
Wonders, a novel sight for the rustics! The city gate shone like crystal with
shutters lined with gold and ornamental arches, granaries made of copper,
moats ﬁlled with lotuses, and gardens and parks. The roads were ﬂanked by
splendid mansions with beautiful gardens. There were assembly halls and
rest houses with gates inlaid with gold and set with gems. The main street
was swept and watered, and the markets and courtyards were strewn with
ﬂowers, tender shoots, puffed grain, and unbroken rice. The entrances of the
houses were decorated with plantain trees with hanging bunches of luscious
fruit, palm trees with golden-colored nuts, rows of lights, strings of ﬂowers,
and festoons of silken scarves and banners. It was as if the city of Mathura
had decked herself out to meet her future Lord. Down the king’s highway,
Krishna and Balarama sauntered, with arms carelessly ﬂung round each
other’s shoulders. The women were thronging the terraces and balconies to
get a view of the one about whom they had heard so much. His kingly gait
and noble mien drew all eyes to him as he strode down the road.
Suddenly, they saw Kamsa’s washerman coming toward them carrying
the king’s clothes. Krishna recognized him of yore. This was the wretch
who had spread calumnious tales about Sita during his incarnation as Rama
in another age! He had a score to settle with him. He stepped in front of him
and blocked his way.
“Dear man,” he said, “will you lend us some clothes? We have just come
from Vraja, and we ﬁnd that our clothes are not fashionable enough for the
city.”
The man haughtily replied, “O mannerless fools! Do you fellows who
generally wander in the jungles wear clothes like these? These are the
king’s clothes, not meant for urchins like you. Get going, or else the
servants of the king will put you in fetters, strip you, and perhaps even kill
you!”
The man’s time for liberation had come. Krishna merely laughed at this
abusive speech and touched him. He fell down lifeless, and his assistants
ﬂed in terror, leaving all the bundles of fancy clothes. The gopas who had
accompanied them gleefully helped themselves to the clothes they fancied.
Next, they went to a tailor’s shop. As soon as the boys entered, he
welcomed them and presented them with clothes ﬁt for princes. The boys
dressed themselves in these, and Krishna blessed the tailor. They proceeded
to the house of Sudama, the garland maker. He honored them and presented
them with garlands made of select ﬂowers and joyfully garlanded the boys
with them. Krishna asked him to choose any boon he wanted. Sudama
chose three boons, which the Lord granted him with pleasure—unﬂinching
devotion to the all-inclusive being, friendship toward his devotees, and
kindness to all creatures.
Then, as they walked on, they saw a peculiar sight. What appeared to be a
bundle of clothes was coming toward them. At a closer glance, the bundle
resolved itself into a woman, who had such a horrible hump that she was
almost bent to the ground. She was rolling along, carrying perfumed sandal
paste to the court. She was a courtesan whose duty was to prepare unguents
for the court and to make herself useful in other ways as well. As she was
hobbling along with eyes on the ground, she suddenly saw in front of her
eyes two feet like tender rose petals. A lovely voice enquired in the kindest
tones she had ever heard, “O beautiful one! Who are you? To whom are you
taking these perfumes? Will you give us some?”
She was thunderstruck. To the best of her knowledge, no one had ever
called her anything but Kubja (hunchback) or Trivarka (threehumped one).
She struggled to lift herself up to see the face from which these words had
come, but she could not manage it.
“O handsome one!” she said, “I’m a courtesan, named Trivarka,
patronized by the king for my skill in making these fragrant pastes. I shall
certainly give you some of it. Who is more eligible than you to use such
precious sandal paste?” Again she struggled to lift herself up. Then she felt
a strong ﬁnger beneath her chin, a hand was placed on her hump, and a foot
pressed down on hers, and lo! she was lifted up, her hump removed, and she
stood tall, straight, and beautiful before that stealer of hearts!
“Let the world see the beauty of your soul in your body itself,
Sairandhri,” he said.
She gazed and gazed at this divine being who had wrought such a
miracle. Her heart overﬂowed with love. What could she give him, poor and
stupid as she was? Sensing her confusion, he asked gently, “For whom are
you taking this sandal paste?”
“Who else but for you, my Lord?” she stammered. Taking the sandal
paste meant for the king, she anointed him with it. As he was about to move
on, she was ﬁlled with panic. What if she never saw him again? The thought
was unbearable. Shamelessly, she caught hold of the garment thrown
carelessly round his neck, and hanging on to it, she whispered, “Come with
me to my house tonight. I can give you nothing else.”
When the girl solicited him thus in the presence of his elder brother, the
Lord looked at the faces of the other gopas and said laughingly, “After I
have ﬁnished the task for which I have come, I shall think of going to your
house.”
Balarama looked on with disapproval at the sight of his young brother
encouraging the advances of this shameless woman, who had the temerity
to hang around his neck in broad daylight, before the interested gaze of so
many spectators. He walked ahead without a word, and Krishna smiled and
followed him, while Kubja gazed after him longingly, her love mirrored in
her eyes. The Lord never refused love, in any form, when given with such
sincerity by a devotee.
Next, they proceeded to the hall where the great bow of Shiva was kept
and worshipped. Many guards had been posted at the entrance. Naturally,
the guards did not expect anyone to force their way in. Krishna walked into
the hall as if he had every right to enter. The guards shouted, “Stop! Stop!
No one is allowed to touch the bow.” Ignoring these commands, Krishna
lifted the bow with ease and bent it so that it broke in the middle, as easily
as an elephant breaking a sugarcane stalk. The terriﬁc sound of the breaking
bow ﬁlled the sky and all the quarters. The guards fell down in heaps, one
on top of the other. The whole city trembled with fear and Kamsa felt a
shaft of pure terror shoot through his heart. He realized that this was but a
prelude—the ﬁrst chords of the stupendous opera that was to culminate in
his death.
After this incident, he could never remain quiet for a moment. He could
neither stand nor sit. Everywhere he saw his enemy Vishnu—on the chair,
on the bed, under it, and in every nook and cranny. Sleeping and waking,
Kamsa had been continuously thinking of Vishnu for the past twenty years.
How could such devotion go unrewarded? Such concentration is rare, even
among yogis. Until his death the next day, Kamsa could not even eat a ball
of rice without breaking it to see whether Vishnu was hiding inside. His
state was indeed enviable.
The guards scrambled up and surrounded Krishna and the gopas, shouting
imprecations and threats. Krishna and Balarama coolly took up the broken
pieces of the bow and drove them off with it. Then they left the hall and
went round the city, seeing more of its marvels. In the evening, they
returned to the garden where their carts were parked. They slept soundly,
while Kamsa, who had heard all the news of their doings from the guards,
did not have a wink of sleep. Early next morning, he gave orders for the
commencement of the wrestling match. The arena was swept and watered.
The galleries were adorned with wreaths, ﬂags, and bunting. Trumpets and
drums sounded. People from the city and countryside occupied the galleries
in order of precedence, while the royal guests had special seats. With a
trembling heart and a bold front, Kamsa sat on the golden throne of the
Bhojas, surrounded by his ministers and chieftains. Amid the sound of
trumpets and the characteristic clapping of their arms by the wrestlers, the
contestants entered the arena. Nanda and his followers, who had been
invited by Kamsa, made presentations to him and occupied one section of
the gallery.
The wrestlers had secret orders to show no mercy and to dispatch the boys
at the earliest opportunity to the abode of Yama, the god of death. When
they reached the entrance to the arena, Krishna saw the elephant
Kuvalayapida, who was being prompted by his cruel trainer to charge at
Krishna. Tightening his garments and tying up his locks in true wrestling
style, Krishna ordered the elephant keeper to keep his beast under control
and make way for him. The irate keeper directed the elephant to charge at
him and catch him in its trunk, but Krishna slipped out of its hold, gave it a
mighty blow on its forehead, and ensconced himself between its legs.
Provoked by the blow and the fact that it could not see him, the animal
smelled him out and caught him in his trunk, but the Lord slipped out once
more and, catching hold of its tail, he pulled it back as he used to do the
calves at Gokula. Then he ran in front of it, and as the elephant chased him
with pointed tusks to gore him, he pretended to fall and quickly rolled away,
so that the elephant pierced the ground with its tusks instead of piercing
Krishna and got stuck. Krishna now plucked out its tusks and beat it to
death, together with its keeper.
Armed with the elephant’s tusks and surrounded by the gopalas,
Balarama and Krishna now entered the arena. According to the state of his
own mind, each person saw Krishna in a different light. To the common
folk, he was a hero. To the women, he looked like the god of love. To the
gopas, he was their beloved friend. To the evil ones he was a terror. To his
parents, he was their darling child, while to the ignorant, he was just a
cowherd boy. To the yogis he was the supreme embodied truth. To the
Yadavas, he was their chosen savior, and to Kamsa, he was the lord of death
himself! Like two actors entering the stage, the two boys strode into the
arena. Everyone was thrilled to see them, for they had heard many rumors
about their prowess.
The mighty wrestler Chanura, veteran of many matches, approached them
and said, “O son of Nanda! O Rama! You are both famous as heroic young
men and experts in wrestling. Hearing this, the king has invited you today
to watch your skill in wrestling.”
Krishna replied, “We are nomadic forest dwellers who have only engaged
ourselves in wrestling contests of a playful nature, with boys of our own age
and strength. Though we are anxious to please the king, how can we dare
challenge professionals like you?”
Chanura replied, “Neither you, who killed the mighty pachyderm
Kuvalayapida, nor Balarama can be called mere boys! You are undoubtedly
qualiﬁed to wrestle with us. You may show your prowess against me, and
Balarama can compete with Mushtika.”
So saying, he led them to the middle of the arena. The Lord was nothing
loath to have a good bout of wrestling! He plunged into this with great
enthusiasm, as he did everything he was called upon to do, as if he were
totally involved in what he was doing. Actually, he was totally detached,
ever immersed in the bliss of his own self, from which he never wavered,
however much he gave the impression of being involved. Entwining, hand
to hand and leg to leg, the wrestlers and the boys closed with each other.
Fist against ﬁst, elbow against elbow, head against head, and chest against
chest, they clashed again and again! Whirling and throwing, hugging and
strangling, pushing and pulling, each tried to overpower the other. Much
distressed to see this unequal contest between the slender young boys and
the devilish-looking professionals, many of the spectators started to walk
out in protest. “Shame! Shame!” they cried. “Let us not watch this
slaughter. A ﬁght should be between equals. What is the fun of watching
this? Sin will accrue to us also!”
But just as the murmurs were getting louder, they saw the slender boy
lifting the mountainous Chanura, whirling him round and round, and
dashing him to the ground. This was child’s play to him, who had held aloft
the Govardhana Mountain for seven days! As for Mushtika, Balarama slew
him, with a careless blow of his left hand. Another pair of gladiators now
came forward and offered battle, for it was obvious that it was indeed a
battle, and again a third pair, only to be slain by the two boys! As the third
round ended, the rest of the wrestlers ﬂed, and the cowherds could no
longer be restrained. They rose as one man from their place in the gallery,
jumped into the arena, and embraced their heroes amid laughter and shouts
of triumph. Then all together, to the accompaniment of the tinkling of their
ornaments, they began to perform one of their folk dances to the great
delight of the assembly. Krishna, as usual, threw himself with equal zest
into this dance, as he had taken part in the macabre dance of death a few
moments ago.
By now, Kamsa was in panic. The carefully planned assassination had
turned into a farce. Foiled at every turn, he was like a madman, shouting
and giving a hundred contradictory orders. “Stop the music!” he shouted to
the drummers, who were pounding away to a crescendo, as he had told
them to do when the boys were killed. The poor drummers did not know
that they were not to play if the wrestlers were killed!
“Catch the boys! Arrest the chieftain Nanda and his followers! Kill that
crooked Vasudeva and that treacherous father of mine, Ugrasena, who has
joined the enemy’s side!” Thus Kamsa shouted in frenzy. The soldiers tried
in vain to catch him who cannot be caught by might alone. Krishna slipped
like quicksilver through their grasp and, making his body light, jumped onto
the high dais with ease. The music stopped. There fell a sudden hush over
the whole crowd, as for the ﬁrst time uncle and nephew came face-to-face.
At last, Kamsa saw in front of him the form that had haunted his nights and
days for nearly twenty years. His imagination had painted many lurid
pictures of Vishnu as he would appear to him, but never one that resembled
this! For a second he looked into those glorious eyes, those twin pools of
kindness, and instead of fear, he felt a great relief, as if, at last, after many
buffetings and storms at sea, he had come in sight of a safe harbor. It was
but a momentary respite. Then, with true Kshatriya valor, he ran forward
with upraised sword to kill the defenseless boy. Krishna caught hold of the
tuft of hair on his head, from which the crown had slipped off, and threw
him onto the ground from the top of the dais. There he lay in the dirt and
dust of the arena—the mighty king of the Bhojas, terror of the Yadavas.
Krishna jumped down lightly onto his chest, and at the touch of the Lord’s
feet, his soul, which had been thirsting for liberation, rose up like a shining
glow and melted into the aura surrounding Krishna. Then Krishna dragged
the body of the dead tyrant around the arena, as a lion might drag a dead
buffalo, so that all his subjects might see that their king was dead.
Meanwhile, the eight younger brothers of Kamsa rose in defense and
came forward to avenge their brother’s death. They were beaten to death by
Balarama, armed with the elephant tusk. Then came the two royal women,
each to lament at the side of her dead husband. After consoling the ladies,
Krishna and Balarama went to release their parents, Devaki and Vasudeva,
from their fetters and touched their feet with their heads. Recognizing them
to be one with the Lord of the universe, Devaki and Vasudeva stood before
them with folded hands, until there fell upon their mind once more the veil
of maya. Then they forgot the greatness of their children and embraced
them with all the love and tenderness that had been suppressed for twelve
long years.
Krishna now spoke to them with great kindness, “O Father! O Mother! It
behooves you to pardon us for not serving you at a time when you needed
us most—when you were imprisoned and oppressed by the wicked Kamsa.
A man is not able to redeem, even in a hundred years of life, the debt he
owes to the parents who gave birth to and nourished the body, which is the
basis for the achievement of all objects in life, including liberation. Vain
were the days of our past life as we failed to be of service to you, when you
were living in dread of Kamsa.”
Having comforted his parents thus, the Lord released Ugrasena, his
grandfather, and proclaimed him king of the Yadavas.
F ull of seductive art she makes and prepares, as a rite, a bed of
ﬂowers, a couch for the rapture of your embrace, of ﬂowers like
heads of the arrows of love. She fears an attack of love upon you,
and lies away hidden;  She wastes away, Madhava, parted from you!
FROM GI TA GOVI NDA BY J AYADEVA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Mathuranathaya Namaha!
1 2
Uddhava at Gokula
Adharam Madhuram, Vadanam Madhuram,
Nayanam Madhuram, Hasitham Madhuram,
Hridayam Madhuram, Gamanam Madhuram,
Madhuradhipathe Akhilam Madhuram!
O Lord of Mathura! Your lips are sweet, your speech is sweet, your
face is sweet, your smile is sweet, your heart is sweet, your gait is
sweet. In fact, O Lord, everything about you is ﬁlled with
sweetness.
The Yadavas had a curse that they should have no king, but all the same,
since his grandfather Ugrasena was the senior-most member and the one
worthy to rule, Krishna made him the ruler of the Yadavas and appointed
Uddhava, a cousin of his and a pupil of the sage Brihaspati, the prime
minister. Then he gathered together all his clansmen, who had ﬂed to
various hiding places due to fear of Kamsa, welcomed them back to their
rightful capital, and resettled them in their homes. The city of Mathura
entered a new phase of life. Once more the citizens could walk about
fearlessly, secure in the might of Krishna and Balarama and delighting in
seeing glimpses of their faces now and again.
It was only now that Nanda realized the bitter truth that the child he had
adored and brought up for twelve years as his own son was not his but
Vasudeva’s. How blithely had he set out for the capital a few days ago!
How happily had he assured his wife that he would return with their
beloved son! Now he found his son to be a king and he himself left to return
home alone and empty-hearted. With what words could he comfort his
wife? In that whole town that had gone mad with joy, he alone grieved. But
Krishna, sensing his deep unhappiness, went and comforted him.
“Dear Father!” he said. “We were nourished, fondled, and cared for by
you with extreme affection. She is the real mother and he, the real father
who takes care of another person’s child as his own. You, O Father, have
done this for us when our parents were unable to look after us. Even
Devaki, who gave birth to me, has never had the joy of nursing me, as
mother Yashoda had. Even Vasudeva has never had the pleasure of
watching my childhood pranks, as you have. O Father, I do not belong to
this person or that. I belong to those who love me. To him who looks on me
as a son, I will go as a son, not only now, but in the ages to come.” His
voice rang out as he said this, as if he were making a promise to posterity.
Nanda felt immeasurably comforted and was able to return to Gokula in a
happier state of mind.
Vasudeva now arranged for all the various rites that had to be done for
Kshatriya children, which had not been done by Nanda. Though Balarama
and Krishna were all-knowing and were the source of all knowledge, they
had hidden that inherent knowledge under the cloak of humanity. Vasudeva
realized that they had to have a formal education, beﬁtting their status. They
had been trained only in the art of looking after cows! For some time, the
fond parents enjoyed the delight of having their sons back with them, but
they were forced to send them to Guru Sandipani, who lived in Avanti, and
there they had to stay for the duration of their studies. In order to
demonstrate to the world the glory of the gurukula system of staying in the
preceptor’s house, they devoted themselves to the service of the teacher,
attending on him as servitors and bestowing on him the honor due to a
divinity. The learned Sandipani imparted to them all the Vedas, including
the Upanishads. He taught them the science of warfare, as well as the
mantras connected with the handling of divine weapons, the ethical codes,
the law codes, the science of logic, and the administrative codes. Pupils
generally took their own time about learning and left the gurukula only after
they had imbibed as much as they were capable of learning. But these
unique princes grasped all aspects of knowledge at the very ﬁrst instruction.
They had such powers of concentration that they mastered the sixty-four
subjects in sixty-four days.
It was during this time that Krishna formed a friendship with the poor
Brahmin boy Sudama. Once when they had gone to the forest to collect
ﬁrewood, they were overtaken by a terriﬁc storm. There was no place to
take shelter, so the boys huddled together and told each other stories to keep
up their spirits. All they had to eat was a small bundle of beaten ﬂakes of
rice that the guru’s wife had given to them. When morning came, they were
discovered by the guru and his wife, who had been searching for them.
They were deeply touched by the boys’ action in having risked their lives to
collect ﬁrewood for their sake, and they blessed them. In later years, when
they met again, Krishna reminded Sudama of this incident and attributed all
his greatness to that blessing given by the guru. Here, the Lord reminds us
that the blessing of a great soul, especially a preceptor, is something to be
striven for and that it is the one thing that will set a person on the right path
of life.
At the end of the course of study, each student had to give the guru a
dakshina, or fee, for having taught him and looked after him for such a
length of time. In those days, unlike modern times, it was the teacher’s duty
to look after both the material and spiritual welfare of the student and no
payment was expected or demanded until the course of study was
completed. Even then, there was no ﬁxed fee. Each student gave according
to his means. When Krishna asked Sandipani what he wanted, the old man
refused to take anything, for he had no desires. So Krishna approached his
wife, who said difﬁdently, “Lord, though you have behaved like an ordinary
child here, I have heard that you are the incarnation of Lord Vishnu. I had
but one child, a boy, who was drowned in the ocean at Prabhasa. I would
like to have him back.”
“So be it,” said Krishna.
Accompanied by Balarama, he went to the great port of Prabhasa.
Approaching the ocean, he ordered Varuna, the Lord of the waters, to bring
back his tutor’s son. Varuna replied that he had been taken away by a
demon called Panchajana, who had the form of a conch. Hearing this, the
Lord entered the ocean and killed the demon, but he could not ﬁnd the boy.
He then took the conch, Panchajana, which formed part of the demon’s
body, and went with Balarama to the abode of Yama, the god of death. He
demanded that Yama return the son of his preceptor. Yama was but a vassal
of the Supreme Lord, and he bowed to him and returned the boy. Krishna
took the child and gave him to his guru as a dakshina from all three of
them, since Sudama, his friend, could not afford to give anything on his
own. Having received the blessings of the guru and his wife, Krishna and
Balarama returned to Mathura after taking a fond farewell of Sudama and
urging him to keep in touch. The people of Mathura were ﬁlled with joy to
see the return of their saviors.
As soon as he returned to Mathura, Krishna heard of the sorrow of his
foster parents and the gopis after his departure. He decided to send his close
friend, Uddhava, with a letter from him. In choosing Uddhava, he had two
purposes. One was to comfort his people and the other was to make
Uddhava understand the meaning of selﬂess love. Uddhava was one of the
most learned and brilliant men of the age, but the avatar of Lord Krishna
was not merely to preach the path of jnana, or knowledge, but also the path
of bhakti, or devotion. It is very difﬁcult for the man of knowledge to forget
his learning and approach the Lord with a simple and innocent mind.
However full of learning we might be, yet all earthly knowledge is but a
drop in the ocean of the all-comprehensive wisdom of the Lord. We are all
but nursery children in his eyes, and it is with the innocence of a child that
we should approach him. Perhaps Uddhava was a little ashamed to be the
messenger of a love letter to milkmaids, but since his love and obedience to
Krishna were exemplary, he set out immediately. By the time he reached
Vrindavana, it was evening, the most beautiful part of the day at Gokula, the
time for which the gopis would wait anxiously, for it brought the return of
their beloved Lord. The cloud of dust raised by the hooves of the returning
cows was highlighted by the last rays of the setting sun. The air was ﬁlled
with the bellows of the bulls, the lowing of the cows, and the buzzing sound
made by the milking of so many cows. These sounds mingled with the
haunting melody of the ﬂutes of the gopalas and the songs of the gopis
singing about the exploits of their hero, Krishna.
Little lights were being lit in every house as Uddhava reached Gokula.
Seeing the chariot and his form from afar, the gopis thought that Krishna
had come back. This was no wonder, for Uddhava resembled Krishna in
height, age, and style of dressing, since he always wore the cast-off clothes
and garlands that Krishna had worn the previous day, such was his love for
him. No wonder that the gopis, who had no other image in their hearts but
Krishna, who saw him constantly, waking and dreaming, mistook Uddhava
for their beloved. They rushed out with joyful cries, “He has come! He has
come! The Lord of our hearts has come!”
Seeing Uddhava, they fell back apace. Then, realizing that he was a
messenger from their beloved, they went close to him, forgetful of their
womanly modesty, unmindful of the fact that he was a stranger whom they
had never before met. They caught hold of his hand, tugged at his upper
garment, and pelted him with questions. Uddhava laughingly warded them
off, though inwardly he was quite shocked. Never in his well-regulated life
had he come across such shameless behavior among women! How could he
comfort them, he wondered? He was rescued from his predicament by
Nanda and Yashoda, who took him to their home and honored him as if he
were Krishna himself. After he had rested and eaten, Nanda asked him, “O
Uddhava, does Krishna still remember the people of Gokula? Does he
remember his poor parents, his friends, the cows, and the hills and dales of
Vrindavana? Will he ever come back to look up his old comrades? We have
been saved from many a danger by his grace. Every spot here is ﬁlled with
memories relating to him. We can hardly attend to our normal duties these
days, for our minds are totally absorbed in thinking of him and his exploits
while he lived with us.” As he was reminiscing like this, both he and
Yashoda were overcome with emotion and could hardly speak. Their tears
ﬂowed, and they remained silent and absorbed in him.
Uddhava marveled at this state of devotion and spoke to them thus: “O
great ones, you are the most praiseworthy among all humankind, if your
minds are ﬁrmly ﬁxed on Krishna, who is none other than the Supreme
Lord, Narayana. He is the soul of all and the cause of all, who has assumed
a human form for the fulﬁllment of certain purposes. What other end is
there for you to achieve? O noble ones, do not grieve. He is ever beside
you, for he is enshrined in your hearts. He has no father or mother, no wife
or son. There is none related to him and none who is a stranger. He has no
birth and no body. He has manifested in this world of his own free will, and
not due to any bonds of karma, in order to bestow liberation on all. Though
free from the gunas of Prakriti, he assumes these gunas for the sake of
sport. Krishna, who is none other than the Supreme Being, is not your son
alone. He is the child of all. He is the father of all. He is the mother of all.
He is the soul of all. There is no entity that can be said to have an existence
apart from him.”
Thus, while they were talking of him, who was dearest to all their hearts,
the night passed. The next morning, Uddhava set out to meet the gopis.
They took him off to where Radha was sitting beneath a tree, immersed in
contemplation of her lover. She scarcely noticed him nor did she pay much
attention to the eager questions of the others. Ever absorbed in the memory
of the days and nights of rapture she had spent with her beloved, she lived
in a world of her own, peopled entirely by Krishna.
The others, in the meantime, were pelting Uddhava with a hundred
questions. They did not give him a chance to speak, for their hearts were
full of the things they wanted to tell Krishna, and what better person could
they tell it to than his friend? They cared not for his prestige or erudition.
The only worth he had in their eyes was that he had come from their Lord.
“Were you sent by that hard-hearted one to comfort his parents?” was
their ﬁrst question. “He could never have sent you to comfort us, for surely
he must have forgotten us after seeing the sophisticated beauties of the city.
Where is he now? Tell us. Tell us the truth. Is he not in the arms of some
beauteous damsel in the city of Mathura?”
Uddhava tried to stammer out a few words, but his studies had never
taught him how to deal with the lovelorn. Then they started weeping and
crying.
“How can we forget that body that has lain so close to us? How can we
forget those arms that have held us so tightly? How can we forget those
eyes that have gazed deep into ours, those rose-petal hands that have
stroked away our tears, and those tender lips, from which we have sucked
the nectar of divine life? Will we ever be able to see him again? Will we
ever be able to hold him close to our breasts again and touch his feet and
feed him with the things he likes best? The only reason we do not die is
because he is still alive. So long as there is hope of ever seeing him again,
we can never give up our lives!”
Uddhava listened to this intimate monologue, astounded and bewildered.
As yet, he was unable to decide what manner of women they were. He
could not believe that they were loose and immoral for such devotion is not
to be found among that class of women, and he could not yet recognize the
depth and extent of their devotion, for he had never seen the like before. To
the gopis, they themselves did not exist as separate individuals. They
existed in Krishna and for Krishna. They had started living only after
meeting him, and in the future they would continue to live only in the hope
of hearing about him and maybe of meeting him. It was a total submerging
of their separate personalities in him, who was the Uttama Purusha, the
supreme or perfect person. Though their bodies appeared to be different, yet
in truth they had no existence apart from him. In all the aspects of their
lives, whether mundane or exalted, they had but one thought, Krishna,
Krishna, Krishna, and then again Krishna! Whatever they saw was a part of
him. The breeze was his breath, the rose his lips, the sunset his clothes, and
the clouds his color. They carried on their duties like automatons.
Sometimes they would sing, sometimes laugh, sometimes cry, as different
thoughts about Krishna came to their minds.
Uddhava tried to speak to Radha, for he had heard Krishna mention her
name many times, but she seemed oblivious to anything but his name. Then
suddenly, she saw a honeybee and started speaking to it as if it were a
messenger from her beloved, “Ah, honey sucker! You are like my Lord—
going from ﬂower to ﬂower and owing allegiance to none, leaving the
ﬂower the moment you have exhausted its nectar. Where have you come
from? You have been sucking honey from his garland, I see. And look, you
have some red powder on your feelers. That must be from the forehead of
some beauty from Mathura, which got into his garland while she embraced
him, and now you have smeared it on yourself while sucking from his
garland. Go away. I cannot bear the sight of you! Having made us drink
again and again from the inebriating nectar of his lips, he has abandoned us,
who have given up everything for his sake—our sons, our husbands, our
homes, and our prospects, here and in the hereafter.”
Suddenly turning to Uddhava, she continued, “We are the widows of
Vrindavana. Bereft and forsaken are we, for our husband has left us, and
now we will never be whole again.” So saying, she buried her face in her
hands and burst out crying. Uddhava marveled at the imagination that was
so immersed in thoughts about Krishna that it could weave a story about
him, even at the sight of a bumblebee! Radha’s sorrow is the sorrow of the
bhakta who realizes that God does not belong to her alone, but to everyone
who loves him. It was a harder lesson for her than for others because for a
short time it had seemed to her that he was hers alone.
Uddhava tried to comfort them. “Listen, O gopis! You have attained the
highest fulﬁllment of life, and the whole world must adore you, for you
have succeeded in surrendering your minds completely to the Lord of all.
Normally, people attain this state through the practice of many disciplines,
vows, and austerities, but even without any of these, I ﬁnd in you an
extraordinary manifestation of love for the divine, which is rare even among
sages. Now listen to the message he has sent for you:
“O beloved ones, I have never left you and will never leave you. You
have never been separate from me, for I am manifest in the whole universe.
If I have not come to see you, it is only because I have still to accomplish
what I have come for. But do not grieve, for your grief is my grief and your
joy is my joy. For love such as yours, there can be no end. I, who am
boundless, have been bound by your love. Blessed are you among women,
for your names will ever be remembered by the world to come. When I am
far away physically, meditate on me, and thus you will be able to commune
with me. Devoid of other thoughts, allow your minds to enter into me, and
then you will attain me without delay.”
Hearing this, the gopis’ grief was slightly assuaged. They told Uddhava,
“O noble one, this River Kalindi, this Mountain Govardhana, these forests,
these cows, the sound of ﬂutes, all these are indelibly connected in our
minds with him. His footprints, placed over these vales, will never allow us
to forget him. Our minds have been completely possessed by him, so how
can we possibly forget?”
“O Lord,” they cried, “O Lord of Lakshmi! O Lord of Vraja, dispeller of
sorrows! Master of Gokula! Be kind enough to lift up this settlement of
ours, which is fast sinking into the sea of sorrow!”
At this heartrending cry, Uddhava reminded them of Krishna’s message
and of their identity with him in spirit. To comfort them and Krishna’s
parents, he stayed on in Vraja for some months, during which he thrilled the
whole community with songs and poems about Krishna’s deeds. What was
more important was the lesson he learned from them, namely, that love such
as this was superior even to knowledge. Before he left Vraja, Uddhava, the
foremost of the Yadavas, brightest student of Brihaspati, prostrated himself
in the dirt at the feet of the cowherd girls of Vrindavana and extolled them
thus, “You are indeed the only ones who have attained the real purpose of
human birth, for you have attained that mahabhava, or extreme yearning for
Govinda, the soul of all, which is aspired to by all, but attained by very few.
Of what use is birth in a high social milieu? Of what use is money or status
or beauty if it does not bring this intense love for the inﬁnite being? Yet by
his grace, you humble nomads of the forest have been blessed with this
state. Love for God produces the same results, irrespective of one’s learning
or social status. Not even Lakshmi, the consort of Vishnu, has received the
grace that has been showered on the gopis of Vrindavana! May I be born as
a bower or a creeper or even a blade of grass in this blessed spot that is
covered with the dust of the feet of these gopis who have burst asunder the
unbreakable bond of love for their own relations and even the path of virtue
approved by society, to follow the way of the Divine, which is only an
aspiration, even for the sages. Again and again do I salute at the feet of
these women of Vraja, whose mental attitude puriﬁes the three worlds.”
This was indeed an amazing statement for any man to make in those times,
especially one as learned as Uddhava. It proclaimed the glory of bhakti
above all other paths to God realization, which is what the life of Krishna
teaches us.
At last, bidding farewell to the gopis and Nanda and Yashoda, Uddhava
got into his chariot to return to Mathura. The meeting of the gopis with
Uddhava was like the mingling of the two rivers of bhakti and jnana, or
devotion and knowledge. Uddhava’s knowledge ﬂowed into the gopis and
strengthened their minds while their bhakti seeped into Uddhava’s heart and
melted his pride. The result of the conﬂuence was the jnana-bhakta, a rare
combination. It was only now that Uddhava realized that Krishna had sent
him not merely to comfort the gopis but to show him an example of a truly
exalted and unselﬁsh love. Poor Uddhava. Little did he realize, as he waved
good-bye to the weeping gopis, that one day he, too, would have to part
from his beloved master. Only at that time would he be able to understand
fully the anguish felt by the gopis.
Krishna never returned from Mathura to Vrindavana. It is as if he wants to
teach a lesson that life is an ever-rolling wheel of time. The wise person is
the one who, like the child, lives entirely in the present, unburdened by the
memories of the past, however sweet, unworried by the prospects of the
future, however dark. Krishna’s life became that of a prince and the advisor
of princes, though he never accepted the throne himself. Henceforth, he
lived in the palaces and courts and council chambers of monarchs, with as
much ease and grace as he had lived in the hills and dales and forests of
Vrindavana.
It is said that on one occasion, unable to bear their separation from
Krishna, the gopis and gopas made a great pilgrimage to the city. It was the
time of the harvest festival, when the earth lies fallow for a while, so the
people may rest. When he heard they had come, he had them brought with
all state and dignity into the audience chamber meant for kings! Krishna
received them with the greatest of love, dressed in the robes and jewels of a
prince. But the rustics would not look at him. With eyes cast to the ground
and heads averted, they stood there, the gopas and gopis of Vrindavana,
uttering not one word, casting not one glance in the direction of the prince,
who stood before them, overwhelming them with his magniﬁcence. Then
Krishna understood what the matter was, and going out of their presence for
a moment, he put off the robes and jewels of state and came back to them
clad in the simple attire of the cowherds. On his head was the tiny circlet
with the peacock’s feather. In his right hand he carried the ﬂute, round his
neck was the garland of vanamala (wildﬂowers), and his feet were bare.
When they saw him like this, in the form of Gopalakrishna, the cowherd
Krishna, they were overjoyed. They begged him to play the ﬂute for them,
and they romped and frolicked and sang all day with him in the royal
gardens, even as they used to do in the meadows and woods of Vrindavana.
Recalling the happy days of the past, they reminded him of his boyhood
pranks, and the Lord played and danced with them with as much abandon
and as much skill as he played the game of kingmaker.
She despises using her unguent of sandal,
She is pale as moonbeams, she discovers sorrow.
F rail she grows, intangible;  malayan breez es act like poison upon
her.
She fears an attack of love upon you and lies away hidden;
She wastes away, Madhava, parted from you.
FROM GI TA GOVI NDA BY J AYADEVA
O Krishna, Thou art the dwelling place for all good people, the
ultimate goal for those in trouble, and the one who banishes the
sorrow of thy devotees, O Krishna, thou art my only refuge.
“DRAUPADI,” MAHABHARATA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Dwarakanathaya Namaha!
1 3
L ord of  Dwaraka
I dam sariram Parinamapeshalam,
Pathathyavasyam Slathasandhi Jarjaram,
Kimaushathayi Klishyasi Mooda Durmathe,
Niramayam Krishna Rasayanam Piba!
This body, which is now attractive, is bound to age one day and will
disintegrate gradually by its very nature. O foolish man! Why try to
perpetuate it through medicines? Utter the sweet name of Sri
Krishna instead, which is the sure remedy for all ills.
FROM “MUKUNDAMALA” BY KULASHEKHARA ALVAR
Krishna, recalling the promise he had made to Trivarka, went to her house
with Uddhava to fulﬁll this promise. It was the purpose of his avatar to go
to each devotee in the form in which his or her innermost heart cried out.
Trivarka, being a courtesan, knew of no other way to please the Lord than
with her body. Since she had nothing else to offer, he accepted it with as
much joy as he accepted the vanamala of the garland maker and the blows
of Kamsa.
Soon after, the Lord, accompanied by Uddhava and Balarama, went to
Akrura’s house to fulﬁll the promise made to him. Akrura worshipped him
with all honor and addressed him thus, “O Lord, today my house has been
rendered more holy than the hermitages of ascetics, for it has had the great
good fortune to have as its guest the supreme parent and teacher of the
world, who is the embodiment of all the divinities. Who is the man who
will seek shelter in anyone other than you, the lover of his devotees, the
universal well-wisher? Not only do you grant the desires of your devotees,
however triﬂing, but you are the one who grants your very self, after
attaining which there is no further fall (into the meshes of worldly
delusion). You have embodied yourself in age after age, whenever the
ancient path of right living and enlightenment, the Sanatana Dharma, which
has been revealed by you, is in danger of being lost. O J anardana, it is the
height of good fortune that you have condescended to come of your own
accord to my humble abode. Grant me the ability to cut asunder the cord of
attachment, your maya’s creation, for son, wife, wealth, house, and body.”
Kamsa had two wives, Asti and Prapti, the daughters of the mighty king
of Magadha, called J arasandha. This king was supposed to be an invincible
warrior with the strength of a hundred elephants. After the death of Kamsa,
his wives returned to their father and begged him to avenge the death of his
son-in-law, their husband. He swore to raze the town of Mathura to the
ground and exterminate the race of Yadavas completely. This would be an
easy matter, he thought, for they were ruled by the doddering old monarch
Ugrasena, assisted by that puny upstart cowherd boy! What could they do
against the might of the Magadha empire?
News of the impending invasion by J arasandha was brought to Krishna,
and he mobilized the Yadava forces to repel the attack. He mustered up as
much of a ﬁghting force as he could in so short a period and made
Kritavarma the general. The Yadavas had scattered in diverse directions
during the rule of Kamsa and had just returned and taken up the threads of
their lives. Krishna had hardly any time to put the state in order. But when
he heard the reports of the impending attack, he was forced to make fast
preparations. The city was ill-prepared to withstand a siege. Krishna knew
well the defects of the city and decided that he had to provide a better
asylum for his people. For the moment, he could do nothing but make the
best use of everything at hand, since J arasandha was advancing toward
Mathura with an army of twenty akshauhinis, or divisions.
The Yadava army managed to repulse the attacks of the Magadha hosts
many times. In fact, it is said that J arasandha attacked seventeen times and
was repulsed every time. But Krishna knew that they could not hope to hold
out much longer. The people were already distressed, normal life had come
to a standstill, and yet the forces of the Magadha king, which were coming,
continuously replenished, kept attacking. Time after time, the huge army of
J arasandha was completely destroyed by Krishna and Balarama. In fact, the
latter managed to catch the king alive and was about to kill him when
Krishna stopped him, for the time of his death was not yet nigh. J ust when
J arasandha was about to start on his eighteenth expedition, he was joined by
Kalayavana, a ﬁerce warrior of foreign origin, who was itching for a ﬁght
with some worthy opponent and thought he could ﬁnd it in Krishna. So he
marched to the city of Mathura and laid siege to it.
The Lord was very much concerned about the predicament of the
Vrishnis, now threatened simultaneously with attack on two fronts, and
decided on a stratagem. He slipped out of the city, taking care to allow the
Yavana to see him as he pretended to escape. Kalayavana had been given
the description of the Lord as wearing a lotus garland and having peacock
feathers on his crown. He was exultant when he saw him slip out stealthily,
or so he thought. He followed him with great excitement, determined to kill
him single-handedly, for if Krishna fell, Mathura would fall. But the Lord
was not as easy to catch as he had expected. Slim and slight was his boyish
ﬁgure, adorned with a simple lotus garland, but he darted hither and thither
and led Kalayavana on a merry chase into the hills surrounding the city and
disappeared into a cave. Krishna had a special purpose for taking him there.
An ancient king of Bharatavarsha called Muchukunda had procured a
boon from Indra, the king of the gods, for having helped him defeat the
demons. The boon asked by the king was that he should be allowed to sleep
in peace for many years, until the advent of the Lord as Krishna, for he was
anxious to behold this form of the Lord. Indra granted him this blessing and
also promised him that if anyone woke him up before the appointed time,
that person would be turned into ashes. This king, Muchukunda, was
sleeping in the cave into which Krishna entered. Naturally, Kalayavana was
ignorant of all this. He followed the Lord into the cave and saw the form of
the sleeping king. In the dim light of the cave, he mistook it for Krishna.
Not waiting to ascertain further details, he directed a well-aimed kick at the
sleeper and said in a loud voice, “Get up, O Yadava! You cannot hope to
escape my wrath by resorting to these childish tricks!”
Being thus rudely awakened from his sleep of aeons, King Muchukunda
turned a baleful eye on the miscreant. Kalayavana was immediately reduced
into a heap of ashes. Krishna thereupon emerged from behind the rock,
from which vantage point he had been watching the proceedings with
interest. Muchukunda’s second boon had been that he would be able to see
Vishnu in his avatara as Krishna, and when he saw the divine form that he
had been dreaming about for years, he immediately rose up and then
prostrated. “Who is it that I am seeing before me? In this mountain cave
ﬁlled with gloom, the brilliance emanating from you is dispelling the
darkness with a glowing light. O great one, please tell me all particulars
about yourself, for I consider you to be an incarnation of Lord Vishnu.”
To him the Lord replied smilingly, “O honored one, my births, deeds, and
names are so numerous that even I cannot recount them all. It may be
possible to count the particles of dust on this planet but not the number of
my births. But know that in this birth I am incarnated in the line of the
Yadus as the son of Vasudeva and am known as Vaasudeva. Because you
have worshipped me in the past and have desired to have a vision of me in
this form, I have presented myself in this cave. O royal sage, choose
whatever boons you want, and I shall grant them accordingly.”
The king said, “O Lord, my life until now has been wasted in vain
pursuits centering on the feeling that the body is the self. Your mighty
power called time reduces to mere dust even a kingly body, encased in silks.
So now, having come to my senses, I do not seek any other blessing than
service at your feet. Who is it that, having once known you, would ask for
any other boon? All material goods are only a means for further bondage. O
Spirit Supreme! O refuge of the helpless! I have been reduced to
wretchedness by the enemies called passions, which are within me, and I
have sought refuge in you. Protect me, O Lord, from the dangers within.”
The Lord replied, “Know, O King, that I did not tempt you with boons to
test your mastery over your desires but only to show how a devotee with
unswerving love for me can never be attached to worldly attractions. I bless
you with unshakable and unwavering devotion to me always and under all
conditions. Go now and practice austerities to remove the effects of your
past karmas. In your next birth, you will be born as a saint with universal
love;  after that, you will attain me.”
Muchukunda, being thus blessed by Krishna, made full prostrations to
him and left in a northerly direction for the ancient shrine of Badrinatha,
where he meditated on the form of the Lord as Narayana and attained
liberation.
When he returned to Mathura, Krishna found that the city was being
besieged by J arasandha for the eighteenth and last time. Krishna and
Balarama now employed another ruse to lure J arasandha. They took to their
heels as if in fright, right in front of J arasandha’s eyes, and climbed up a
hill. J arasandha followed them but could ﬁnd no trace of them. So he
heaped ﬁrewood around the hill and set ﬁre to it. When the ﬂames started
leaping up, Balarama and Krishna, making use of their yogic powers,
jumped clear of the ﬂames and made their way back. J arasandha returned
home feeling satisﬁed that he had seen the last of his two troublesome
enemies, and he told anyone who cared to listen that he had just returned
after making a bonﬁre of the two Yadava brothers.
It was at this time that Raivata, the king of the land of Anarta, offered his
daughter Revati in marriage to Balarama. Part of the kingdom was also
given as dowry. For sometime now, Krishna had been thinking that Mathura
was in too vulnerable a position to be defended and that they should change
their capital to a safer place. The island of Dwaraka, which lay just beyond
the peninsula that Balarama had received as a bride price, was a natural
fortress, surrounded as it was by the sea on all sides. By his yogic powers,
Krishna made a wonderful city on this island, with properly planned
highways, ﬂower gardens, beautiful mansions and palaces, parks, temples,
and lakes. He employed the celestial architect, Vishwakarma, to get the
town built. The Yadavas were transported to the island fortress of Dwaraka,
while Krishna and Balarama lured J arasandha away.
Under the guidance of the Lord, the Vrishnis became one of the most
powerful people in Bharatavarsha, as India was known in those days. Those
were stirring days in the country, and the position of Krishna in the
powerful Vrishni state placed him in the forefront of the affairs of the
country. Kings sought his approval and the alliance of his people. It was
never his way, however, to interfere personally in the affairs of any state.
Instead, he chose certain agents who advanced the course of history for the
fulﬁllment of the cosmic purpose. For himself, he regarded the whole of life
as if it were a sort of play at which he was the audience. Thus, he allowed
events to work themselves out even though this led in the end to the self-
destruction of all things. But the body was not his concern;  he had come to
ensure the spiritual evolution of all humankind and to reestablish on a ﬁrm
footing the ancient law of righteousness, the Sanatana Dharma.
In this objective, his main agents were the Pandavas, who belonged to the
Kuru dynasty, which ruled over a vast portion of the north. The great epic,
the Mahabharata, deals in great detail with the fortunes of this dynasty and
contains the ﬁrst authentic account of the life of Krishna. The life of
Krishna would not be complete without an account of the Pandavas.
Veda Vyasa, the grandson of the great sage Vasishta, was the author of the
Mahabharata. He was the son of the sage Parasara and the ﬁsherwoman
Satyavati, who later married the Kuru king, Santanu.
King Santanu’s ﬁrst wife was the goddess Ganga, by whom he had a son
called Bhishma. After the birth of their son, Ganga left him, and the king
was bereft for many years. At last, he met Satyavati whom he wanted to
marry, but her father refused to allow him to marry her unless he promised
that her children would be the heirs. Santanu was loath to agree to this,
since his eldest son Bhishma had already been proclaimed as heir apparent
and he was a most noble lad, beloved by all. But Bhishma came to know of
his father’s predicament, and he took an oath that he would remain a
lifelong celibate and would never demand the kingdom.
Thus Santanu married Satyavati and had two sons called Vichitravirya
and Chitrangada. Chitrangada died at an early age. When it was time for
Vichitravirya to marry, Bhishma represented him at the swayamvara of the
daughters of the king of Kasi and brought away the three princesses, called
Amba, Ambika, and Ambalika. On the way, Amba revealed that she had
already given her heart to King Salva, and so Bhishma sent her back to him.
The latter, however, refused to accept her, since she had been forcefully
abducted by Bhishma in the presence of all other suitors. So Amba returned
and asked Bhishma to marry her, but he refused. She swore vengeance
against Bhishma. She went to the forest and practiced severe austerities,
gave up her life, and was reborn as Shikandini, the daughter of King
Drupada of Panchala. As she grew up, she remembered her past, went to the
forest again to practice severe austerities, and became transformed into a
male, known as Shikandin, the destined slayer of Bhishma.
Vichitravirya died after some years of marriage with his two wives
Ambika and Ambalika, leaving no issue, and Satyavati’s father’s ambition
came to naught. Determined to preserve the line of the Kurus, Satyavati
tried to persuade Bhishma to marry his sisters-in-law, but he was
unshakable in his resolve to keep the oath of celibacy he had taken up, for
her sake alone. Satyavati was forced to summon her eldest son, the sage
Vyasa, and beg him to cohabit with her daughters-in-law, thus allowing the
lineage to continue. According to rule, a childless widow could beget
children through a holy man who had transcended body consciousness in
order to continue the line of her departed husband, and the children would
be known as her husband’s children.
Ambika and Ambalika had to be coaxed to accept Vyasa, who had the
unkempt appearance of a yogi. The former closed her eyes in horror as he
approached, and her son, called Dhritarashtra, was born blind. Ambalika
turned pale with fright at the sage’s visage, and she had a son called Pandu,
who was extremely pale. The queen mother persuaded Ambika to accept
Vyasa once more, but she shuddered in horror and sent her maid instead.
The maid received the sage with all due honors and was blessed by a highly
virtuous and wise son, called Vidura, who was supposed to be the
incarnation of Yama, the god of death and righteousness.
Until the children came of age, Bhishma directed the affairs of the Kuru
kingdom. As Dhritarashtra was blind, the younger son, Pandu, was crowned
king and made commander-in-chief of the army, and Vidura, who was a
repository of wisdom and knowledge, was made the prime minister. Once
again, Bhishma looked around for suitable brides for his nephews.
Gandhari, daughter of the king of Gandhara (modern Afghanistan), agreed
to wed the blind Dhritarashtra. Determined that she would not enjoy the
sight of a world that her husband could not see, she blindfolded herself with
a scarf for the rest of her life. To protect her interests, her elder brother
Shakuni was sent to live in the Kuru capital of Hastinapura.
Vasudeva, the father of Krishna, was the son of Sura, who had a daughter
called Pritha, who later came to be known as Kunti, for she was adopted by
the king Kuntibhoja. As a young girl, she had received a boon from the sage
Durvasa that she could invoke any god she chose with a mantra and he
would bless her with a child. The innocent Kunti, in order to test the
efﬁcacy of the mantra, invoked the sun god, Surya, who gave her a divine
child, born with shining armor and earrings, later known as Karna. Since
she was still unwed when she begot the child, she placed the baby in a
casket and ﬂoated it down the Ganga, where it was rescued by a charioteer
from Hastinapura called Adhiratha. He and his wife Radha brought up the
child as their own. Since his foster mother was Radha, the boy was called
Radheya.
Soon after this incident, Kunti was given in marriage to Prince Pandu of
Hastinapura, who later also wed Madri, the princess of Madra. Once when
Pandu was hunting in the forest, he shot and killed a mating deer, who
cursed him that he would die if he ever had relations with his wives. The
grief-stricken Pandu then decided to renounce the world and live in the
forest, but his two queens were determined to accompany him. After some
years in the forest, Pandu became anxious to have progeny, but since he had
the curse, he knew he could not procreate sons on his wives. It was at this
time that Kunti told him of the mantra given to her by the far-seeing sage,
Durvasa. Pandu was overjoyed and suggested that she invoke Yamadharma,
the god of righteousness. From him, Kunti gave birth to a son called
Yudhishtira, who was famous for his righteousness. A year later, Kunti
invoked Vayu, the lord of the winds, and by him she begot a strong son
called Bhima. In the meantime at Hastinapura, Gandhari gave birth to a
hundred sons and one daughter;  the eldest son was known as Duryodhana.
As soon as he was born, all sorts of ill omens were seen. Vidura prophesied
that this child would bring about the destruction of their dynasty and that he
should be destroyed at once, but Dhritarashtra refused.
Meanwhile in the forest, Kunti invoked Indra, the king of the gods, and
was blessed with a famous son called Arjuna. Madri now wanted a son too,
so Kunti taught her the mantra, and she invoked the twin gods, the Aswini
Kumaras, who gave her twins called Nakula and Sahadeva. These ﬁve sons
of Pandu came to be known collectively as the Pandavas, and they were the
ones chosen by Krishna to direct the course of events in the history of
Bharatavarsha.
J ust prior to Arjuna’s birth, an event of great importance had taken place
in a little prison cell at Mathura. The Lord Vishnu had incarnated himself as
Krishna, son of Vasudeva and Devaki. There was a strong bond between
Krishna and Arjuna, and it was to him that the Lord gave the wonderful
message known as the Srimad Bhagavad Gita.
The Pandavas were brought up in the forest for sixteen years, until Pandu
died. His second wife immolated herself in his funeral ﬁre, and Kunti was
left alone to look after the ﬁve boys. The sages of the forest persuaded her
to take her sons to Hastinapura and stake Yudhishtira’s claim to the throne
of the Kurus, for he was the eldest son. Bhishma welcomed them with open
arms and arranged for their education, together with the hundred sons of
Dhritarashtra, who were collectively known as the Kauravas. Duryodhana
was the same age as Bhima, the second of the Pandavas. He was a haughty
and wicked child, doted on by his blind father, Dhritarashtra, and
encouraged in his wickedness by his uncle Shakuni. When they came to
Hastinapura, the Pandavas enjoyed for the ﬁrst time the luxuries of palace
life. They were taught the princely arts by their tutor, Kripa. Later, the great
teacher and archer Dronacharya, or Drona, was brought there by Bhishma
to teach the princes all the kingly arts.
Much to the chagrin of their cousins, the Pandavas excelled in everything
—studies, games, and the art of warfare. They were also wise, obedient, and
polite. Bhima, especially, was a thorn in the side of his cousin Duryodhana,
whose boyish envy was fanned to ﬂames by his uncle and evil counselor,
Shakuni. Aided by him, Duryodhana tried many methods to kill Bhima,
including poisoning and drowning. But, by the grace of the Divine, Bhima
escaped from all these dangers and became stronger than ever.
At the end of their period of studies, Drona arranged for a tournament, in
which the princes could show off their prowess. Arjuna was Drona’s star
pupil and his favorite, so he was kept until the last. After he had exhibited
his skill in archery, another young man, wearing golden armor and earrings,
came into the arena and proved himself equal, if not superior, to Arjuna.
This was no other than Karna, the eldest son of Kunti and the half brother of
the Pandavas. Of course, no one guessed his identity and all thought him to
be the son of the charioteer Adhiratha. Duryodhana, however, was quick to
see possibilities, so he promptly struck up a friendship with Karna and
bestowed on him the title of the Prince of Anga. This gave Karna the status
necessary to challenge the Pandavas, if need be, for only those of equal
status could challenge each other. Karna was deeply grateful to Duryodhana
for this and swore allegiance to him for the rest of his life.
The military training of the princes now drew to a close. Drona then
demanded his guru-dakshina, or fee. He had a grudge againt Drupada, the
king of Panchala, for he had not kept a promise he had made to him in his
youth. Drona never forgave Drupada for this, and now the end of the
training of the Kuru princes, Drona demanded as his guru-dakshina that
Drupada be captured alive and brought to him. Arjuna was the one who
managed to do this. Drona’s love for Arjuna grew with this
accomplishment, and he released Drupada unharmed, for all he wanted was
to humble his pride. Drupada, however, became obsessed with thoughts of
revenge upon Drona. He was also ﬁlled with admiration for Arjuna’s
prowess. He swore that his son, Drishtadyumna, would kill Drona and that
his daughter, Draupadi, would marry Arjuna.
When Yudhishtira came of age, he was crowned yuvaraja, or crown
prince. The blind king would have preferred to crown his own son, but he
had to bow to the wishes of the people as well as to those of the elders like
Bhishma, Drona, and Vidura. Within a year of installation as heir apparent,
Yudhishtira proved himself fully worthy of the choice, though he was only
eighteen years of age. In the meantime, Bhima and Duryodhana had
become Balarama’s pupils in order to learn the art of mace ﬁghting. In fact,
Duryodhana became his favorite pupil! Arjuna’s forte was archery, and
Drona taught him all he knew, some of which was kept a secret even from
his own son, Aswatthama, whom he knew to be unworthy of this gift.
Drona also advised Arjuna to be devoted to his cousin Krishna, who was the
embodiment of divinity.
Duryodhana’s jealousy increased day by day when he saw how everyone
doted on the Pandavas and how Arjuna had even conquered several
kingdoms. However he could do nothing against the Pandavas for the time
being, for public support was entirely for them.
Far away in Dwaraka, Lord Krishna knew of the plots being brewed in
Hastinapura and feared for the safety of his cousins. To try to avert the
threatening storm, if possible, he sent Akrura to Hastinapura. Akrura went
and stayed for some months in the capital of the Kurus to gauge the pulse of
the city, and he realized that, although on the surface everything seemed
smooth, the palace was a bed of intrigue in which plots and counterplots
were being hatched by Duryodhana to evict the Pandavas from the kingdom
and grab the throne for himself. Kunti spoke to him in private and told him
that she lived in the palace like a doe, surrounded by a pack of wolves.
Except for Vidura, there was none she could trust or talk to, and she lived in
mortal fear for the lives of her sons. “Krishna! O Krishna!” she cried, “pray
protect me and my children, who are in extreme distress. I do not ﬁnd any
other support than your lotus feet!”
Akrura comforted her as best as he could and told her not to worry, for the
Lord was well aware of her plight and had sent him especially to console
her. Akrura then approached Dhritarashtra and warned him against the folly
of treating his brother’s children badly. The blind king agreed with all that
was being said to him, but he proved himself too weak to go against the
wishes of his son, Duryodhana.
The growing popularity of the Pandavas only served to fan the ﬂames of
jealousy that were gnawing at Duryodhana’s vitals. At last, unable to bear it
any longer, he approached his father and threatened to commit suicide if
something was not done to “remove” the Pandavas. The father demurred at
ﬁrst, but eventually gave in. He summoned Yudhishtira and invited him and
his brothers to spend a holiday with their mother at the holy city of
Varanavata, considered sacred to Lord Shiva. In the meantime, Duryodhana,
aided by his uncle Sakuni, his brother Dussasana, and his friend Karna, had
constructed a guest house at Varanavata made of lac, a highly inﬂammable
material, for the Pandavas. The plan was to burn them alive after a year,
when all suspicions had died down. But thanks to their wise and virtuous
uncle, Vidura, who was constantly alert to Duryodhana’s machinations,
Yudhishtira was warned of the possible danger. Vidura had also seen to it
that a secret passage was made from the palace to the forest, through which
they could make an escape when the need arose.
The people of Varanavata were delighted to have their crown prince in
their midst, but the Pandavas were well aware of the time bomb on which
they were sitting, and Kunti directed Bhima to keep watch and alert them
when the time for action arose. He made a study of the surrounding forest
and planned their escape. Exactly a year later, the fateful day of amavasya,
or the new moon, when the night was at its darkest, the attack was supposed
to take place. However, Bhima invited Purochana, who had been
commissioned by Duryodhana to do the fateful act, for dinner at the palace,
and having plied him with liquor, Bhima himself set ﬁre to the building and
escaped with his brother and his mother into the forest. News of the disaster
spread like wildﬁre through the country. The Kauravas secretly rejoiced,
while others mourned. Only Vidura, Bhishma, and Krishna knew that the
Pandavas had escaped. From then on, the Lord kept a close watch over the
movements of the ﬁve brothers. He guided them through their stay in the
forest and ever afterward, during their stormy career, for they were his
chosen instruments in the propagation of the eternal dharma in
Bharatavarsha.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
  Aum Madhavaya Namaha!
1 4
Abduction of  Rukmini
Jayathu Jayathu Devo Devakinandanoyam,
Jayathu Jayathu Krishno Vrishnivamsa Pradipa,
Jayathu Jayathu Meghashyamala Komalango,
Jayathu Jayathu Prithvibharanasho Mukunda.
Victory to the Supreme Divinity born as the delightful child of
Devaki.
Victory to Sri Krishna who is the enlightener of the race of the
Vrishnis.
Victory to Mukunda (Krishna), who removes the burden of the
earth, caused by the wicked.
FROM “MUKUNDAMALA” BY KULASHEKHARA ALVAR
Soon after the defeat of J arasandha, Balarama’s marriage took place to
Revathi. It was after this that Krishna built the city of Dwaraka and shifted
his entire clan to the island fortress. Now he was free to see to his own
personal affairs, and he made his ﬁrst marital alliance—with Rukmini, the
daughter of King Bhishmaka of the country of Vidarbha. The king had ﬁve
sons and one daughter, noted for her beauty. The eldest child, a son, was
called Rukmi, and the youngest was a daughter called Rukmini. She had a
character to match the loveliness of her face, and many were the princes
who aspired for her hand. But she did not give a thought to any of them.
Her grandfather was a great devotee of Lord Krishna, and from childhood
she had grown up hearing stories about Krishna. She vowed that she would
marry none other than the prince of the Yadavas. The sage Narada used to
visit the palace often and regale her with stories of the greatness of Krishna,
who was none other than Lord Vishnu. He also informed her that she herself
was the incarnation of Lakshmi Devi, the consort of Vishnu, and that
Krishna alone was the ﬁtting groom for her. Thus, from the age of ﬁve
onward, her heart was completely ﬁxed on the Lord. Though her father and
grandfather were very happy with her choice, her eldest brother Rukmi was
determined to give her in marriage to his friend Shishupala, the prince of
Chedi, who was Krishna’s cousin. J arasandha, who was still rankling from
his defeat at the hands of the upstarts, Krishna and Balarama, was also
nursing his grievance and biding his time to put down the might of the
Yadavas. He had formed an alliance with King Bhishmaka of Vidarbha and
King Dhamaghosha of Chedi. He gave his own granddaughter to Rukmi
and urged him to get his sister to marry Shishupala, son of Dhamaghosha.
So Rukmi, without consulting either his father or sister, arranged for a
swayamvara, or wedding ceremony, for his sister at Kundinapura, the
capital of Vidarbha. Normally, many kings were invited to a swayamvara,
and the bride could make her choice from among them, but this
swayamvara was only a farce, for Rukmi was determined to get her to
marry the groom of his choice. He knew of her predilection for Krishna and
feared that she might refuse if she were given an ultimatum to marry
Shishupala. All arrangements were made and invitations were sent to all
places, except Dwaraka, before Rukmini was told. She was horriﬁed when
she heard this and pleaded with her father to intercede, but he was too old
and frail and was a ruler in name alone. All decisions were in the hands of
his son, and Rukmi would brook no arguments. In vain she begged her
other brothers, but they were deaf to her pleas. At last, on the morn of the
day previous to her wedding, alone and bereft, she lay in her bedroom
sobbing her heart out, when suddenly, there was a gentle knock at the door.
She did not hear, so the door opened a crack and in stepped a Brahmin of
noble mien.
“My lady! Why do you weep so?” he asked. “It is your wedding eve, and
you should be rejoicing rather than weeping!”
“I would rather it were the eve of my funeral,” Rukmini said in a low
voice, averting her face so that he could not see its tear-stained state.
“I’m but a humble Brahmin, but I have known you from the time you
were a child, and I would gladly do anything I can to help you. You have
but to order me.”
Startled at this last-minute offer of help from such an unexpected quarter,
she looked up and was struck with a daring idea. Her cheeks ﬂushed and her
heart beat fast at the audacity of what she had in mind, but without pausing
to conjecture and weigh the pros and cons, she made an immediate decision,
since that appeared to be her only hope. It is said that the Lord, in order to
test her determination, had waited till the last moment before instigating the
Brahmin to go to her aid.
“O revered one! Will you take a letter to my Lord Krishna, scion of the
Yadava race, residing at Dwaraka, and bring back a reply before the
wedding, which takes place the day after tomorrow?” Rukmini asked
timidly.
“Certainly,” said the Brahmin. “I will willingly do anything for you.” Not
by a word or a ﬂicker of an eyelid did he betray the fact that he thought it
unusual for a gentle nurtured girl, a princess of her standing, to be writing
letters to someone she did not know, especially on the eve of her wedding!
Neither did Rukmini cast a thought to the correctness of her behavior. All
she knew was that if she could not have Lord Krishna as her husband, she
would rather die, and since death held no charms for her at the moment, she
had to make an all-out effort to save herself. Rukmini’s behavior both
before and after this episode is so full of womanly modesty and charm that
it is difﬁcult to imagine how she ever bolstered up the courage for such a
bold move. However, the explanation is simple. Like the gopis, her love
was so great that her ego was completely obliterated, and her natural
tendencies could not act as an obstacle to her union with the Lord. She felt
that she was about to submerge in the waters of samsara, and the only one
who could save her was the Lord of her heart, who was also God incarnate.
Naturally, she clutched at whatever means were offered to her.
“Make haste, O noble one!” she said. “Take the fastest horse and speed
away to Dwaraka and back, for if he fails to arrive at the appointed time, I
shall surely put an end to my life!”
The Brahmin disappeared in a trice. What powers he used to make the
long journey from Vidarbha to Dwaraka in such a short time is anybody’s
guess. Rukmini spent the rest of the time in an agony of suspense, at times
elated, at times cast into despair. Sometimes she would think, “He’s the
Lord of all. Surely he will not forsake me.” Then she would say, “I’m so
unworthy, how can he ever want to marry me?” Thus, she spent the day and
night alternately crying and praying and longing with all her heart that he
would answer her prayers.
When the Brahmin reached Dwaraka, it looked as if he was expected, for
the guards of the gate allowed him to enter immediately and he was taken
without any loss of time to the Lord’s presence, where Krishna himself
welcomed him and took care of all his wants. After he was rested, the Lord
enquired about the purpose of his visit as if he knew nothing about it.
“What part of the country are you coming from? Why have you taken the
trouble to cross the sea and come to me? Are you in some trouble? Is there
anything I can do for you?”
Without preamble, the Brahmin, who knew well the urgency of the
situation, bowed and said, “O Lord! I have not come for my own sake but
for the sake of your devotee, the princess of Vidarbha, who has sent a letter
through me, for your kind perusal.”
“Read it! Read it!” Krishna commanded, and the Brahmin read out the
tender message.
“O Bhuvanasundara (handsomest one in the entire world),” the letter
began, “having heard of your wonderful qualities, my heart has left its
keeping forever. O granter of liberation, who is the girl of noble birth who
has attained marriageable age, who will not choose you for a husband if she
could have you? Therefore have I chosen you and offer myself to you, if
you will deign to accept me as your wife. Do not allow the prince of Chedi
to appropriate me, for I belong to you alone! Whatever merit I might have
acquired by way of sacriﬁces, austerities, and charities, I now offer in
exchange for the honor of being accepted as your wife. If you will deign to
accept this offering of my very self, then please present yourself at the
swayamvara that has been arranged for me. Defeating the armies of Chedi
and Magadha, please capture and marry me according to the rakshasa rites,
the bridal money paid on the occasion being nothing else but your might! If
you are wondering how I might be carried away, I will give you a hint. On
the morn of the wedding day, there will be a grand procession going to
worship at the shrine of the goddess Parvati, situated just outside the palace.
The bride will accompany this procession. This will be the most convenient
time for you to stake your claim. O lotus-eyed one! If you fail to be
gracious to me, I shall not despair. I shall fast unto death. This I shall do life
after life until I get you as my husband.”
Was there a ﬂicker of a smile in the depths of those all-knowing eyes
when he heard this gently worded threat? It is difﬁcult to say, but when he
had read this moving epistle, the Brahmin looked expectantly at his face
and said, “I have brought this private message to you, O Lord of the
Yadavas. Now whatever is to be done in this matter should be done
immediately, for the swayamvara takes place tomorrow.”
Krishna caught hold of the Brahmin’s hands and said, “Away, O noble
one! Let us go immediately to Kundinapura and rescue the princess! I
cannot get any sleep thinking of her!” He who dwells in the hearts of all had
already known what was in her heart and had been waiting anxiously for
her message.
He ordered his charioteer, Daruka, to bring his chariot immediately. He
hustled the Brahmin into the chariot and left immediately for the country of
Vidarbha without waiting for the return of his brother Balarama, who had
gone on an expedition. When the latter returned, he was quite annoyed to
ﬁnd that Krishna had acted in his usual impetuous fashion and had left
without taking a ﬁghting force with him. Having heard of his destination, he
was sure that he would not be able to abduct the princess without some sort
of skirmish, for he knew well of Rukmi’s antagonism toward them and of
his alliance with J arasandha. So he followed Krishna as fast as he could
with a battalion. The Lord’s four ﬂeet-footed horses were known as Saibya,
Sugriva, Meghapushpa, and Valahaka, and they made short work of the
distance between the Anarta country, in which lay Dwaraka and
Kundinapura, the capital of Vidarbha, and arrived there on the morn of the
swayamvara.
Kundinapura was well decorated for the swayamvara of its princess. The
streets were swept and sprinkled with rose water. Multicolored ﬂags and
ornamental arches decked with garlands adorned the roads, and the perfume
of burning incense emanated from all the houses. All the citizens were
attired in their best, adorned with jewelry, sandal paste, and ﬂower
garlands. Learned Brahmins chanted mantras from the Rig, Sama, and
Yajur Vedas to offer protection for the bride from all adverse psychic forces,
while others, who were well versed in the Atharva Veda offered oblations in
the ﬁre to the accompaniment of chants for the paciﬁcation of the planets.
J ust as Bhishmaka, the king of Vidarbha, was doing for his daughter,
Damaghosha, the king of Chedi was doing for the well-being of his son,
Shishupala, the proposed bridegroom. The bridegroom party started for
Kundinapura accompanied by an army with a full complement of elephants
and horses, foot soldiers, and chariots decorated with golden chains. They
were given a royal welcome by the princes of Vidarbha and taken to a
special apartment reserved for them. A large number of kings, such as
J arasandha, Salva, Dantavakra, and Paundraka, who were all allies of
Shishupala, were also assembled.
The whole night Rukmini had kept vigil from the top of the palace
looking out for the Brahmin’s arrival. Morning dawned with no sign of him.
Desperately, she prayed to the Lord to save her from her predicament.
While she was thus praying, her left arm, eye, and thigh started throbbing,
which was a sure sign of good fortune in a woman. Very soon, the Brahmin
arrived and gave her the joyful news of Krishna’s arrival in the city and his
vow to carry her off by force, if necessary, Her joy at hearing this was so
great that she could think of no adequate recompense for the bringer of such
news. Her eyes ﬁlled with tears of joy and gratitude, and she prostrated
before him. The Brahmin blessed her and departed.
Next, the court ladies came to attend to her toilette. She was dressed with
inﬁnite care, for she was going to meet her beloved for the ﬁrst time. She
peered anxiously into the mirror. Would he like her? Would he think her
beautiful? She was plagued with a thousand doubts, yet brimming with joy.
The ladies wondered what made the pensive maid of the previous day
blossom into an excited and ravishing bride!
Hearing that the Yadava prince had come to attend the swayamvara,
Bhishmaka was delighted. In his heart of hearts, he wanted his daughter to
marry Krishna, but he knew that his son had deliberately refrained from
sending Krishna an invitation, and he rejoiced that Krishna had come
uninvited. He went personally to receive Krishna, showered him with every
mark of love and respect, and escorted him to the best residence, which by
rights should have been given to the bridegroom. Hearing of Krishna’s
arrival, the citizens ﬂocked to have a glimpse of his unique personality.
They murmured among themselves that he alone was the ﬁtting groom for
their beloved princess Rukmini.
The time was approaching for the bridal procession to start for the temple
of the goddess Parvati. Accompanied by a glittering array of married ladies,
Rukmini set out on foot to worship the Divine Mother, but her mind was
absorbed on the lotus feet of her Lord. Observing a vow of silence, she
walked down the avenue, lined with soldiers bristling with swords, for
Rukmi had heard rumors of Krishna’s arrival and his vow to abduct the
bride. Trumpets, conchs, and kettledrums blared. Rose petals were strewn
down the road, and Brahmin ladies adorned with jewels, ﬂowers, and
sandal paste preceded the bride. Singers, bards, and minstrels extolled her
beauty as Rukmini walked down the route to the temple, but she heeded
them not. Her attention was entirely focused on trying to have a glimpse of
that beloved form. She peeped in vain through the folds of her transparent
veil, but she could not see him. On reaching the temple, she washed her
hands and feet, performed the puriﬁcation rites with water, and entered the
shrine, outwardly composed but inwardly agitated. She prayed to the Divine
Mother, as the gopis of Vrindavana had done long ago, to help her to
procure the Lord Krishna as her husband.
“O Mother Parvati. Again and again do I prostrate myself before you and
before your children Ganesha and Kartikeya. May you be pleased to grant
my prayers to wed the Lord Krishna. May you be pleased to grant my
prayers to have the Lord Krishna as my husband.”
Worship was offered to the goddess as well as to the married Brahmin
ladies who had accompanied her, and they in turn blessed her and gave her
the consecrated remains of the offerings. Now she could break her vow of
silence, and she came out of the temple holding the hand of her lady-in-
waiting. As she came out, she lifted her veil for a second, as if to make an
offering of her beauty to the Supreme Being embodied in Lord Krishna.
Crowds had gathered outside to catch a glimpse of her entrancing beauty,
and she cast them a bewitching smile, which so enraptured the watching
princes and kings that they lost control over their hands. Their weapons fell
from their nerveless grasp, and they closed their eyes as if to enfold her
beauty and treasure it in their hearts forever. Delicately stepping forward on
her rose-petal feet, she scanned the lines of royalty for one beloved face.
Suddenly she sighted Achyuta, the Unchanging Being, he who never falls
and who never allows his devotees to fall. Sitting in his eagle-crested
chariot and smiling tenderly at her was he, to whom her heart had been
given from the age of ﬁve, dearer to her than her own self. Boldly, she
stepped forward to the chariot that had been conveniently placed in the
middle of the path. Now that she was sure he had come, she lowered her
eyes as beﬁtting a modest bride, but as she reached the chariot her delicate
hand, laden with jewels, was raised, as if to make it easier for him to grasp
it. Seeing this, Krishna smiled, and bending down, he lifted her up to the
seat beside him, slowly and deliberately, in full view of her brother and the
other princes, like a lion lifting its prey from the midst of a pack of jackals.
He then whipped up the horses and ﬂew through the crowded streets. The
citizens made way for him and cheered wildly for they were ﬁlled with joy
at the thought that their prayers had been answered. As if mesmerized, the
rest of the kings watched this drama of the princess being abducted right
under their noses. Then pandemonium broke loose. Precious minutes were
lost trying to clear the roads of the citizens and soldiers, who blocked it as
soon as the lovers had gone.
Violently angry at the slight on their names, the other kings pursued the
pair. They were stalled by Balarama and the Yadava army, who had arrived
on the scene in the nick of time. Sensing his bride’s fear, the Lord reassured
her with a smile. Seeing the determined resistance of the Yadava forces,
J arasandha and the other kings gave up and returned, for such incidents
were commonplace in most swayamvaras!
Rukmi, however, was determined not to give in, for he had given his word
to his friend Shishupala and did not know how he could face him if the
bride was not brought back. He caught up with the eloping couple and
challenged Krishna to a duel. Krishna defeated him, but refrained from
killing him at Rukmini’s entreaties. He satisﬁed himself with cutting off
Rukmi’s topknot, which was considered to be an insult worse than death.
Balarama reprimanded Krishna for having done such a thing to his brother-
in-law, but Krishna merely smiled, for he knew that a time would come
when his brother would have reason to do a much graver injury to Rukmi.
In the meantime, J arasandha took upon himself the thankless task of
comforting the bridegroom, who was still sitting in blissful ignorance of the
stirring events that had just taken place. He had been lost in a beatiﬁc vision
in which he was sporting with his beautiful bride in the enchanted gardens
of the palace that he had speciﬁcally built for her, which he had even named
after her, so sure had he been of his prize. He was rudely jolted out of his
reverie by the booming voice of J arasandha.
“Wake up! Wake up! O heroic prince! Let’s be off!”
“Where? What?” stammered Shishupala. “Has the auspicious time come
for the groom to enter the marriage hall? Has the bride returned after
praying at the temple?”
“She has not only come but she has also gone!” said the unfeeling
J arasandha. He then enlightened the poor groom as to the true state of
affairs.
Shishupala was quite heartbroken, and J arasandha consoled him. “Don’t
lose heart over such a triﬂe as the loss of a bride. I’ll ﬁnd you a much better
one. Look at me. I remain equal in victory and defeat. I was defeated by
Krishna seventeen times, yet I’m not bothered. Today they are victorious
because time is in their favor. When the tide of time turns in our favor, we
will defeat them and recapture your bride.”
“But I do not want someone better,” protested Shishupala. “I want
Rukmini. I’ve even named my new palace after her!”
“Well, you’ll just have to rename it,” said J arasandha unfeelingly, “for
Rukmini has been abducted by that rascally cowherd Krishna, while you
have been sitting here and dreaming!”
“Can’t we go after him?” Shishupala enquired anxiously.
“We did, and we were defeated, but Rukmi has not given up. He chased
after them.”
“Was he able to bring her back?” Shishupala asked agitatedly.
“No,” said J arasandha shortly. “Krishna insulted him by removing his
topknot, and he has sworn not to return to Kundinapura until he has killed
Krishna!” Without wasting time on further useless conjecture, he proceeded
to hustle the dejected Shishupala out of the groom’s palace and back to his
own country.
Defeated and deprived of his army and name, Rukmi resolved to stay
alone at a place called Bhojakata, where he nursed his grievance against
Krishna and swore not to enter his capital until he had killed him and
rescued his sister and thus erased the blot on his fair name.
In the meantime, Dwaraka, the capital of the Yadus, was preparing itself
to welcome the royal couple. The citizens were thrilled to hear of the
romantic abduction of the princess of Vidarbha by Krishna, and the couple
was met with joyous hails of welcome. The wedding was conducted on a
grand scale as if it had been the marriage of Lord Vishnu with Lakshmi
Devi, as indeed it was, for was not Krishna the incarnation of Vishnu and
Rukmini of Lakshmi?
Her face a moon is fondled by the ﬂuttering petals in her hair,
Her hair disheveled and the ﬂowers disarranged,
A certain girl;  ex celling in her charms, unrivalled, waits for the
enemy of Madhu.
FROM GI TA GOVI NDA BY J AYADEVA
O eternal companion, certainly you are not just the son of Yashoda
but the immanent witness in all embodied beings. I n response to the
prayer of Brahma, the creator, you have risen among the Yadavas to
protect the world.
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Jagannathaya Namaha!
1 5
T he C ursed Gem
Anyatha Sharanam Nasthi,
Twameva Sharanam Mama,
Tasmat Karunya Bhavena,
Raksha Raksha Janardana.
O J anardana (Krishna), I have no recourse to anything else, I have
surrendered completely to thee. By thy grace alone, may I be saved.
Another young girl who was pining for love of Krishna was Satyabhama,
only child of the Yadava chief Satrajit. Since he had no sons, he had
brought her up to be proﬁcient in all manly pursuits. Consequently, she was
both haughty and high spirited and considered herself superior to all the
men she met. It was only when she saw Krishna that her pride was humbled
and she felt herself to be, quite simply, a woman. Her father had already
promised her in marriage to a young Yadava stalwart called Shatadhanva,
but when Krishna came to know of her love for him, he decided to fulﬁll
her desire to become his wife. To accomplish this, he had to undergo many
difﬁculties, even to the extent of getting himself a bad name;  thus he proved
that he was willing to undergo any trial to serve his devotees.
Satrajit had been in straitened circumstances at one time and had done
severe tapasya (spiritual discipline) to the sun god Surya, who had given
him a beautiful jewel called the Syamantaka. This gem had the ability to
produce eight times its weight in gold daily, if it was worshipped with the
proper rites. It was, moreover, a talisman against disease, misfortune, and
theft. Needless to say, Satrajit prospered, but too much wealth had its ill
effects. He started to lapse from the high code of dharma that he had
followed and started living a life of vain and useless luxury. Realizing this,
and in order to save him from his own folly, Krishna requested that he hand
over the jewel to Ugrasena, the king, but Satrajit refused. Proud of his
precious possession, he did not want to part with it and worshipped it daily.
The love and devotion that should be given only to God were given to the
jewel. The habit of putting mammon above God has always landed human
beings in trouble. He suspected that everyone was after his jewel;  he
suspected Krishna particularly of having designs on it. What he did not
suspect was that Krishna had designs on his precious daughter and that, too,
with her full consent and connivance!
As Satrajit was suspicious of everyone, he had very few friends. The only
two he felt he could trust were his brother Prasena and the man he had
chosen to be his prospective son-in-law, Shatadhanva. The latter would
come and sit for hours, nodding wisely at everything Satrajit said and
boring Satyabhama. She was quite determined that she would not marry
him, but she was too fond of her father to suggest Krishna’s name as an
alternative. So she bided her time and prayed to the Lord to disentangle her
from this web. The time came soon enough. One day, her uncle Prasena
came to Satrajit and begged to be allowed to wear the jewel when he went
out hunting. In vain, Satrajit tried to dissuade him from this foolish act, but
Prasena had set his heart on it and would not give in. At last, Satrajit
acceded to his young brother’s wish, and Prasena set out for the forest with
the Syamantaka hanging like a gleaming ball of ﬁre around his neck, a
cynosure of all eyes. During the course of the day, he became separated
from his companions and found himself alone in the middle of the forest.
Suddenly, he was faced with a hungry lion who was attracted to him by the
glittering jewel around his neck, which it mistook for a lump of ﬂesh. The
lion killed Prasena and made off with the jewel. In turn, it was attacked and
killed by J ambavan, the king of bears, who took possession of the jewel and
presented it to his daughter J ambavati.
When the hunting party returned without his brother, Satrajit was sunk in
gloom. No amount of searching disclosed any trace of either the man or the
missing jewel. Satrajit came to the conclusion that his brother had been
killed by Krishna in order to get the Syamantaka, which he had been
coveting for some time. Satyabhama’s heart sank when she heard this, for
though she knew it to be absolutely untrue, it seemed to put the lid on all
her hopes. The rumor was bruited abroad and soon reached Krishna’s ears.
He laughed and shrugged it off, but both Balarama and Uddhava were
insistent that he do something to clear his name. So, accompanied by them
and some of the other Yadavas, he set out for the forest in which Prasena
had gone hunting.
Penetrating deep into the wood, they soon came across the decomposing
body of Prasena, where he had been killed and left by the lion. A short
search revealed the fact that the gem was missing. Following the lion’s
tracks, they climbed up the mountain, where they found the carcass of the
lion, slaughtered by the king of bears. Not ﬁnding the jewel on the lion,
they followed the footprints of the bear, which took them to the mouth of a
fearsome-looking cave. The general opinion was that it would be foolish to
venture in, for the cave was reputed to be the dwelling place of an old and
mighty bear who killed everyone on sight. But Krishna decided to press on.
He knew how anxiously Satyabhama was awaiting his reappearance, for her
only chance of happiness lay in his safe return with the jewel. “We have set
out to ﬁnd the Syamantaka,” he said, “and ﬁnd it I will, before I return.”
Krishna forbade anyone else to accompany him, for it was something he
had to do himself. In fact, this was the fulﬁllment of a promise made during
his incarnation as the avatara Lord Rama. He told Uddhava and Balarama to
return to Dwaraka if he did not appear within twelve days. The cave
belonged to J ambavan, the ancient bear who had helped Lord Rama at the
time of the war with the demon Ravana. At the end of the war, when the
Lord asked him to choose a boon, J ambavan had asked him to marry his
daughter J ambavati. But in that incarnation the Lord had sworn to take only
one wife and that was Sita. He therefore promised to fulﬁll J ambavan’s
wishes in his incarnation as Krishna and also told him that his daughter
would retain her youth until then. It was for this girl that J ambavan had
killed the lion and snatched the jewel.
As Krishna entered the cave, he found it lit up by the brilliance of the
Syamantaka, with which the girl was playing. When she saw the handsome
stranger, she ran to call her aged father. Leading a cloistered life in the cave,
she had not been acquainted with many men before. As for J ambavan, he
was so old that he could barely see at all. Since he lived alone in the forest
with a young and beautiful girl, his usual method of greeting strangers was
to hit ﬁrst and ask question later. He had no means of knowing that this
stranger was none other than his Lord and Master, Sri Rama, who had now
taken the form of Krishna and come to fulﬁll his promise. He greeted
Krishna with powerful blows of his adamantine ﬁsts. The Lord was happy
to accept any offering from his devotees. Some offered ﬂowers and others
blows. Nothing loath, he gave back blow for blow and punch for punch. For
twenty days and nights they grappled thus with each other. At last, with his
joints dislocated, enfeebled, and exhausted, J ambavan began to get worried,
for he felt that there was none who was capable of resisting his blows but
his Divine Master. Filled with doubt, he pried open the overhanging lids of
his eyes with his gnarled paws and looked at the bright vision before him.
Lord Krishna stood there in the form of Sri Rama. With a cry of remorse,
J ambavan prostrated before him and extolled him.
“I know you to be the all-pervading being and the controller of
everything. You are the soul of time. You are the creator and sustainer. You
are the Supreme Being, the Lord of all divinities. I know you to be that
Rama who built a bridge over the sea and destroyed Lanka. Pray forgive me
for my ignorance in having fought with you!”
The lotus-eyed Lord stroked the battered body of his devotee with loving
hands and spoke to him, “The blows of my devotees are as precious to me
as their ﬂowers. I have come to this cave to retrieve the Syamantaka, which
I have been accused of stealing. Now tell me what is your desire, for I have
come to grant it.”
J ambavan clasped the Lord in his hairy arms and rejoiced in the fact that
his old eyes could still see the form that he had carried around in his heart
for so many centuries. “Today my life has been fulﬁlled by your vision, and
I want nothing for myself. But I’m too old to protect my daughter, and I
would like you to accept her, together with the jewel.”
Krishna smilingly agreed, for he remembered the promise made in
another age and another role.
When he returned to Dwaraka with J ambavati and the jewel, he found the
city in turmoil, for the rest of the party had returned some time ago and
spread the news. Everyone was cursing Satrajit and praying to the Divine
Mother to restore their darling prince, Krishna. Satyabhama, too, was in
distress, and her joy when she saw him return knew no bounds. Krishna
summoned Satrajit to the Yadava Assembly, and there, in full view of
everyone, he gave Satrajit the jewel Syamantaka and also explained to him
how it had been traced. With his head bent in shame for having doubted
him, Satrajit received the jewel and returned home. He racked his brains as
to how he could win the Lord’s favor as well as erase the sense of guilt from
his own mind. While he was cogitating thus, Satyabhama decided to take
matters into her own hands and whispered to her father that the best way to
earn Krishna’s forgiveness was to emulate J ambavan’s example. To redress
his grievous wrongs in having hit the Lord, he had given his daughter in
marriage to him! The hint was obvious. It was in Satrajit’s hands to make
equal amends for his own outrageous behavior. He brightened visibly at the
suggestion, for even though he had already chosen someone else for his
daughter, this seemed the best way out of his problem. Happy at having
found a solution, he went straightaway to Krishna and offered him both his
jewels—his daughter and the Syamantaka. The Lord accepted the former
and refused the latter, and the wedding was conducted with no loss of time,
much to the chagrin of Shatadhanva, the erstwhile suitor who had been
rejected.
Rukmini and Satyabhama are supposed to be the incarnations of the two
consorts of Lord Vishnu, Lakshmi Devi and Bhumi Devi—the goddess of
wealth and the Earth goddess. It is said that Lord Krishna had 16,108 wives.
One hundred are said to be the personiﬁcations of the principal Upanishads.
As for the remaining, it is said that the human mind is capable of having
this many vrittis, or mental vibrations, in every breath. Lord Krishna, being
the master yogi, had perfect control over his mental modiﬁcations, as
symbolized by the control he had over his numerous wives.
Unlike his other wives, Satyabhama had a mind of her own. She
demanded her rights, not merely as a wife but as a helpmate in all ﬁelds,
including warfare, for which her father had given her ample training. So
while the rest of his wives sat at home and engaged themselves in womanly
pursuits, she often accompanied Krishna wherever he went, sometimes even
to war!
It was soon after his marriage with Satyabhama and J ambavati that the
ﬁre incident took place at Varanavata, in which the Pandavas and their
mother Kunti were supposed to have perished. The Lord knew that they had
escaped, but he also knew that the time was not yet ripe for them to return
to Hastinapura, so he went with Balarama to the land of the Kurus to fulﬁll
the duties of a relative. Meeting Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, and others, he
joined them in their mourning.
During the Lord’s absence from Dwaraka, a plot was hatched by Akrura
and Kritavarma in order to tease Shatadhanva. One day, they met
Shatadhanva, the jilted suitor of Satyabhama, and asked him in mock
sympathy, “Why are you looking so glum these days?”
This was just the opening Shatadhanva had been longing for, and he
poured out his tale of woe, of how he had been the apple of Satrajit’s eye, if
not of his daughter’s, and how he was completely ignored by him now. In
fact, he would look the other way if they chanced to meet on the road.
Akrura and Kritavarma were extremely sympathetic over this.
“The only way to redress this wrong,” they told him, “is to go and
confront Satrajit and ask him for an explanation. He promised you both his
daughter and his jewel, so if you were deprived of one, at least you deserve
to have the other. He shouldn’t be allowed to get away with such a blatant
breach of promise.”
Thus goaded, Shatadhanva fortiﬁed his ﬂagging spirits with some potent
wine and went to Satrajit’s house in the middle of the night, armed with a
dagger. His senses befuddled by the alcohol he had imbibed and his self-
pity aroused by the words of the other two, he forgot all rules of Kshatriya
Dharma and murdered the sleeping Satrajit in cold blood, escaping with the
jewel. The women of the household woke up and started to wail.
Shatadhanva was terriﬁed at what he had done and ran off to Kritavarma’s
house with the jewel. The latter refused to have anything to do with him and
threw him out before someone arrived and implicated him in the plot.
Shatadhanva then turned to Akrura for advice and told him that it was
entirely due to his sympathetic attitude that he had resorted to such violent
measures. Akrura also hastily backed out and swore that he had not meant
him to do any such thing and that he would have nothing to do with a plot
that would antagonize Lord Krishna, whom he knew to be God incarnate.
He advised Shatadhanva to leave town as fast as he could. Being a trusted
member of the council of elders, he wanted to have nothing to do with such
a suicidal plot. Shatadhanva felt himself to have been sadly let down by his
two supporters, and as he ran off, he threw the ill-fated jewel into Akrura’s
house, for he knew that the possessor of the jewel would certainly be
suspected of the murder.
Next morning, there was a hue and cry that Satrajit had been brutally slain
for the sake of the Syamantaka, and a warrant was immediately issued for
the arrest of anyone who was in any way connected with the crime. Seeing
the dead body of her father, Satyabhama swooned and was totally bereft of
her usual courage. She had the body preserved in oil and left immediately
for Hastinapura to apprise Krishna of the mysterious circumstances
resulting in her father’s death. Though he was well aware of everything, the
Lord did his best to comfort her. He had always known that a man who set
so much store by his wealth would surely come to grief because of it.
However, to placate his wife, he returned to Dwaraka to discover the
murderer. Hearing of Krishna’s arrival, Shatadhanva procured the fastest
horse he could get and ﬂed from Dwaraka. Balarama and Krishna, who
already had some suspicions about him, heard about his ﬂight and gave
chase. They caught up with him at the city of Mithila, where Shatadhanva’s
horse dropped dead. He started running on foot. Krishna also got down
from his chariot and chased him. They had a short scufﬂe in which
Shatadhanva was killed, but a search for the jewel proved futile. Balarama
was sure that he must have entrusted the jewel to someone at Dwaraka and
that they should go search for it. However, since the king of Mithila was a
good friend of his, Balarama decided to stay with him for a while. During
this time, Duryodhana came to take lessons from him in mace warfare and
somehow managed to endear himself to Balarama.
Duryodhana was capable of beguiling many with the charm of his
personality, when he chose to do so.
Krishna returned to Dwaraka and informed Satyabhama that her father’s
death had been avenged, but the jewel was still missing. Hearing all this,
Akrura and Kritavarma were terriﬁed, for Shatadhanva was the third person
to die because of the ill-fated gem. Krishna knew the jewel to be in
Akrura’s possession. He also knew that Akrura, being a good man, would
use the wealth for noble purposes and not for self-aggrandizement. He
advised the pair of them to go on a pilgrimage to the holy city of Kasi and
stay there for thirteen years, after which they could return safely. Akrura
took the Lord’s advice and left for Kasi, where he lived the life of a sage
and used the gold produced by the gem to beneﬁt the city and help the
pilgrims. Of course, this was not known to anyone, but Balarama was not
satisﬁed with the way the whole matter had been settled and suspected that
Krishna was hiding the truth from him. To clear his doubts, Krishna recalled
Akrura at the end of thirteen years and told him to display the jewel
publicly before the assembly. This was done, and the jewel was given back
to Akrura with this admonition, “This jewel is too dangerous for ordinary
people to wear. Only a person possessing great austerity and spiritual worth,
like you, is competent to wear it. So take it back and may it bring all
auspiciousness to you.”
Thus, the Lord showed the world that even this cursed gem, when kept in
the hands of a devotee, did no harm to him and could even be put to good
use, for a devotee always uses his wealth to serve others and not for his
personal and selﬁsh ends.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Achyuthaya Namaha!
1 6
T he Pandavas
Janami Dharman Na Cha Me Pravritti,
Janami Adharman Na Cha Me Nivritti,
Twaya Hrishikesa Hridastitena,
Yada Niyunktosi Tada Karomi.
I know what righteousness is, yet I am unable to do it,
I know what unrighteousness is, yet I am forced to do it!
O Hrishikesa (Krishna), thou art the dweller in my heart,
As thou guidest me, so shall I act.
After having sent Akrura to Kasi with the Syamantaka, the Lord turned his
attention to the plight of the Pandavas. He sent Uddhava to discover their
whereabouts, for he knew well that they had escaped. Uddhava hated to be
parted from Krishna even for a minute, but his slightest wish was
Uddhava’s command, so he proceeded to the forest where, with the help of
a rakshasa boy, he managed to trace the missing Pandavas. The rakshasas
were a race of cannibalistic tribes, living in the dense forests of
Bharatavarsha. They were strong and uncultured. Bhima, however, was the
equal of any rakshasa in strength. He had killed the rakshasa Hidimba, who
had tried to molest them, and married his sister Hidimbi, who had fallen for
his muscular charms. She had taken them to the rakshasa encampment in
the dense forest, and there the rakshasas had accepted Bhima as their king.
He came to be called Vrikodara, or the wolf-bellied one. Subsequently, he
had a son called Gatotkacha by her. When Uddhava found them, they were
living in a tree house, and though Bhima was enjoying himself, the rest
were having a hard time of it. They could not reconcile themselves to the
barbarous practices and cannibalistic eating habits of their dear brother’s in-
laws. They greeted Uddhava with cries of delight and begged him to ask
Krishna to rescue them from their plight, for they did not know which was
worse—to be eaten alive by the rakshasas or to court murder at the hands of
the Kauravas! Uddhava assured them that their welfare was nearest to
Krishna’s heart and that all things would come to pass, as he willed.
Krishna, in the meantime, had gone to the court of Drupada, the king of
Panchala, at his invitation. The kingdoms of the Kurus and the Panchalas
were two of the most important ones in Bharatavarsha, and if they could
unite, they could easily put down the might of the wicked king J arasandha.
Unfortunately, Drupada had a grudge against Bhishma for having employed
his enemy, Drona, to teach the Kuru princes.
Drona and Drupada had studied together as boys, and in a ﬁt of boyish
enthusiasm, Drupada had promised, when he became king, to share his
kingdom with his impoverished friend. Though it was but a casual promise
made in childhood, Drona never forgot it. When he was in desperate straits,
with no means even to give milk to his only son, Asvattama, he went to
Panchala to claim his share of the kingdom. Drupada was quite horriﬁed at
having been taken so literally and offered him as much wealth as he would
need, but Drona proudly refused and swore vengeance. Later, he became a
tutor to the Kuru princes, and at the end of their course of study, as has been
said, he demanded that they should capture and bring back Drupada to him
as guru-dakshina.
The high-spirited boys set out, and Arjuna, aided by Bhima, captured the
king in a surprise attack and brought him before their preceptor. He was
freed only after he gave up his entire kingdom to Drona, which the latter
returned to him in a magnanimous gesture, as he no longer wanted it. After
all, Drona was a Brahmin, and it was a Brahmin’s duty to be forgiving, but
he forgot that Drupada was a Kshatriya, and the Kshatriyas are known to
nurse their revenge. Drupada swore to avenge this insult, and he fed his
children, Draupadi and Dhrishtadyumna, on tales of revenge. He was
determined that Draupadi should marry Arjuna, whom he considered the
bravest warrior in Bharatavarsha, and humble the pride of Drona, who
loved Arjuna more than his own son. He was also determined that one day
his son Drishtadyumna should kill Drona. When he heard of the death of the
Pandavas in the House of Lac, he was terribly disappointed, but his priests
told him not to despair, for their predictions could not go wrong, and his
daughter would certainly have Arjuna as her husband. It was at this time
that Krishna approached him and advised him to hold a swayamvara for
Draupadi in which he should arrange a challenging test, the winner of
which would win the bride.
The test, arranged by Guru Sandipani, was a very difﬁcult one. A whirling
emblem of a ﬁsh was suspended with ﬁve strings to a pole ﬁxed in the
middle of a pool. J ust beneath the ﬁsh was a disc with a hole in the middle.
The contestants were to be given a bow and ﬁve arrows, which they had to
shoot through the hole and bring the ﬁsh down by looking at its whirling
reﬂection in the pool. There were only ﬁve people in the whole of
Bharatavarsha who were capable of doing this. Of these, three belonged to
the Yadava clan: Krishna himself, Satyaki, and Uddhava. All three refused
to participate, since Krishna did not want it. The other two were Karna and,
of course, Arjuna, who was believed to be dead.
Having received Uddhava’s report on the situation of the Pandavas,
Krishna sent Vyasa to the rakshasa encampment to advise them to proceed
to the city of Ekachakra disguised as Brahmins and await the call of destiny.
All the greatest princes and kings of the land were invited to the Draupadi
swayamvara. The hundred Kauravas as well as Shakuni, Karna, Drona, and
his son, Asvattama, were there. J arasandha of Maghada had come, though
he was old enough to be Draupadi’s grandfather. Shishupala, prince of
Chedi, Salya, king of Madra and uncle of Nakula and Sahadeva, as well as
Bhishma and Vidura were there. The Yadavas, headed by Krishna and
Balarama and accompanied by Uddhava, Satyaki, and others, had come as
spectators, for they refused to take part in the contest. The Pandavas, who
had been staying at the nearby town of Ekachakra, had also come to the
tournament, disguised as Brahmins.
Draupadi was a ﬂaming beauty, tall and dark, with lustrous eyes and long
black tresses. As was the custom, at the start of the swayamvara she was
escorted into the hall by her chaperones and introduced in turn to the
various princes who had assembled to try their luck at winning her hand.
As she came to Krishna, she gazed long at him, her brilliant eye shooting
blue ﬂames. She had heard much about his miraculous deeds but had never
met him. Who was the woman who could look into his bewitching eyes and
be able to resist their charm? Krishna shook his head slightly, as if to say, “I
have other plans for you.” From that moment of wordless communion, she
became an ardent devotee of the Lord and turned to him at every crisis in
her life.
At last, the tournament began. One by one, the defeated princes and kings
slunk back to their seats. Even Karna, the acclaimed archer, was unable to
fulﬁll the taxing demands of the contest. At last, when everyone else had
failed and it looked as if Draupadi would remain a maiden, a slight and slim
youth got up from the ranks of the Brahmins and stepped forward, asking
permission to try his hand even though he was not a Kshatriya.
Drishtadyumna, Draupadi’s brother, who was master of ceremonies, gladly
gave his consent. Krishna alone recognized Arjuna and gave him a brilliant
smile of encouragement. The youth stepped forward, lifted the bow with
ease, strung it, shot the ﬁve arrows in quick succession through the
revolving disc, cutting the ﬁve strings that held up the ﬁsh, and brought the
target down, to the amazement of the assembly. There was pandemonium in
the crowd. The Brahmins were jubilant, and the Kshatriyas voiced their
disapproval, as they had been humiliated. Amid the confusion, Draupadi
walked over with her lilting gait and garlanded the youth. Duryodhana, as
usual, was the ﬁrst to resort to violence, for he had been badly smitten by
Draupadi’s charms. He tried to attack Arjuna, but Bhima uprooted a tree, as
easily as one would pick up a mushroom, and stood ready to defend him.
Next, Duryodhana incited Karna to challenge him, but Arjuna defeated him.
This was the prelude to a general skirmish that was brought to an end by
Lord Krishna, who declared that Draupadi had been won in a fair contest,
and if the others did not like it, they could air their grievances in private and
not in public.
The next day, the Lord went to meet the Pandavas and his aunt Kunti,
who were living in a potter’s hut. He promised her that he would never
forsake her sons. From that day on, Kunti became an ardent devotee. Arjuna
and Krishna are supposed to be the incarnations of the ancient rishis (sages)
Nara and Narayana, who were themselves incarnations of Lord Vishnu.
They are ever engaged in doing tapasya (spiritual disciplines) at
Badrikashrama for the welfare of humankind. Thus, there was a strong bond
between Krishna and Arjuna.
The Lord now returned and disclosed to Drishtadyumna the identity of the
Brahmin youth who had won his sister. Both he and his father, Drupada,
were delighted when they heard this, since this was just what Drupada had
been hoping for. So he invited the Pandavas to the palace, and arrangements
were made for a grand wedding at which all ﬁve brothers wed Draupadi.
Their mother, Kunti, had made them promise that they would share
everything they possessed, little realizing to what extent they would honor
her words. Krishna and the other Yadavas were also present.
When this news reached Hastinapura, Duryodhana felt terribly
humiliated. Not only had his dastardly plot failed, but the Pandavas had also
snatched the girl of his choice from beneath his nose. Now they were in a
stronger position than ever before, for Drupada was no mean opponent and
Krishna had made it clear that he was entirely on their side. Encouraged by
his uncle Shakuni and his friend Karna, Duryodhana, with the Kauravas,
marched on Kampilya, the capital of Panchala, where the Pandavas were
residing in honor. Duryodhana wanted to try to nip their power in the bud.
But the Kauravas met with a resounding defeat, which only served to
increase Duryodhana’s wrath. Finally, after much persuasion from Bhishma,
Drona, and Vidura, the blind king, Dhritarashtra, forced Duryodhana to
invite the Pandavas back to Hastinapura. Yudhishtira, who was ever anxious
to comply with the wishes of his elders, agreed, and the Pandavas,
accompanied by their mother and their new bride, returned in triumph to
Hastinapura, where they were welcomed with a great show of cordiality.
For some time they lived in apparent amicability with their cousins, and it
appeared as though the enmity between them had ceased. But Shakuni, as
usual, fanned the ever-smoldering coals of Duryodhana’s hatred, and Karna
promised to defeat the Pandavas single-handedly.
Encouraged by this, Duryodhana forced his father to divide the kingdom
and send the Pandavas away from Hastinapura. Dhritharashtra was too
weak to refuse his son anything, so he summoned Yudhishtira and informed
him of the decision to divide the kingdom. The portion given to them was
known as Khandavaprastha and had been the ancient capital of the Kurus
during the time of their ancestors, Yayati and Pururavas. Now it was but a
forest, overrun by wild animals and rakshasas. The brothers were horriﬁed
at this trick of the old king, but Yudhishtira, as usual, could not refuse any
request made by Dhritarashtra, who was like a father to him. Moreover,
Krishna told him to accept, provided the king gave him enough craftsmen,
cattle, and gold to establish a city. So Yudhishtira agreed, and Krishna and
Arjuna went to Khandavaprastha to clear the forest. When they arrived,
they were met by an old man who declared himself to be Agni, the god of
ﬁre. Due to the amount of ghee he had consumed at a yajna, he was
suffering from indigestion, and he begged the two of them to help him get
rid of his disease. The only cure for him was to consume the forest of
Khandava, which was ﬁlled with medicinal herbs. But since the forest
belonged to Indra, the god of rain, Agni was unable to consume it, for as
soon as he tried to do so, Indra would bring a shower of rain and put him
out! Arjuna immediately promised to help him, and Agni presented him
with Varuna’s bow, called Gandiva, two quivers with an inexhaustible
supply of arrows, and an armor that could not be pierced. He also gave him
a chariot and a ﬂeet of horses. Agni then presented the Sudarshana Chakra
to Krishna, which was the weapon of Lord Vishnu. Krishna acted as
Arjuna’s charioteer, and the two of them drove round and round the forest at
lightning speed, enabling Arjuna to shoot a continuous stream of arrows,
which acted as a shield over the forest, while Agni licked up the entire
forest with his tongues of ﬂame. Because of this dome of arrows, Indra was
unable to penetrate into the forest with his showers. Mayan, the architect of
the demons, was in the forest when it was being burned, and since Arjuna
allowed him to escape, he was very grateful and agreed to build them a
wondrous city. To appease Indra, Krishna promised to name the new city
Indraprastha. Thus in one master stroke the Lord engineered everything so
that the forest was cleared, Arjuna got his divine weapons, and the help of
Mayan was obtained to plan the assembly hall of the new city.
The Lord also got the help of Vishwakarma, the architect of the gods, to
build the city of Indraprastha on the banks of the Yamuna, on the spot
where modern Delhi stands today. It was a wondrous city with all
conveniences, rivaling Dwaraka in beauty and splendor. Mayan built them
Maya Sabha, or the Hall of Illusions. It was a wonder to all who saw it. On
an auspicious day, Yudhishtira was crowned king of Indraprastha. He was
the ideal monarch. The welfare of his subjects was his only concern, and he
created another Rama Rajya (rule of Lord Rama, a golden age). He was
dharma incarnate, and with Krishna to help and advise him, he ruled wisely
and well. For the ﬁrst time in their storm-tossed lives, the Pandavas felt
happy and secure.
Soon after they took up their residence in Indraprastha, Arjuna,
accompanied by Krishna, set out on a hunting expedition. At the end of the
day, tired and thirsty, they went to the banks of the Yamuna to refresh
themselves. They were struck by the sight of a beauteous damsel strolling
along the banks. When questioned by Arjuna, she informed him that her
name was Kalindi. She was the daughter of the sun and lived in a house
beneath the river, where she had sworn to stay and practice austerities until
she met the one, who was the incarnation of Lord Vishnu, for she had sworn
to wed none but him. Arjuna told her that the object of her devotion was
standing but a yard away. She was delighted to hear this and prostrated at
the Lord’s feet and begged him to accept her. They returned to Indraprastha
with Kalindi and got the blessings of Yudhishtira. The Lord then returned to
Dwaraka and solemnized his marriage to her.
Krishna had a half sister, Subhadra, who was younger than he. She had
grown up to be a lovely girl, and Balarama was anxious to have her married
to a suitable bridegroom. Arjuna had met her on one of his visits to
Dwaraka, and they had been attracted to each other, but only Krishna knew
of this attachment. Before he could broach the matter to his brother, Arjuna
was forced to go on a pilgrimage for one year. In the meantime,
Duryodhana had expressed a wish to marry Subhadra, of whose beauty he
had heard. Balarama promptly agreed to this proposal, since he had a weak
spot for Duryodhana and quite fancied the idea of an alliance with the
Kurus. Krishna was none too happy to hear the news, for he knew
Duryodhana’s nature only too well and did not want his only sister to suffer
at the hands of this unprincipled and haughty man. However, he kept silent,
for he knew that his brother had given his word and could not back down,
so some stratagem would have to be devised if his cousin Arjuna was to
wed Krishna’s sister.
Arjuna’s year of pilgrimage was coming to a close. He decided to end it at
Dwaraka and to see Krishna as well as Subhadra and perhaps broach the
subject of his marriage. During this year, his beard had grown, and he was
clad in the soiled and crumpled clothes of the wayfarer, quite unlike his
usual debonair self. Thus it happened that no one recognized him when he
entered the city, where he was well known. Thinking it to be a huge joke, he
sat under the shade of a banyan tree with half-closed eyes as if in deep
meditation. Soon people gathered around to watch the holy man, and from
them Arjuna gathered the latest bit of gossip—that Subhadra was betrothed
to Duryodhana. It was only now that poor Arjuna really felt like renouncing
the world! What a bitter blow fate had dealt him! To have the cup brought
to his lips and then to have it dashed to the ground was too much bear. What
had Krishna been doing to consent to such a thing? Thus he ruminated and
sat under the holy tree, sunk in deep and gloomy reverie, which quite
convinced the ordinary folk that he was a great saint. He hardly ever smiled,
he was always meditating, and he expressed no desire even for food.
That night it rained in torrents. Krishna, who was spending the night in
Satyabhama’s palace, suddenly started chuckling. When she asked him
what the matter was, he replied, “The thought of Arjuna pretending to be a
sannyasi (monk) and sitting under the banyan tree in this pouring rain,
when his mind is full of Subhadra, is making me laugh.” Very soon,
Balarama heard of the arrival of this great saint in their midst. He could
never resist a holy man and went posthaste to meet him. “Hail, O holy one!”
he said, “blessed is our city to have the sight of noble sages like you.”
Arjuna was slightly embarrassed at ﬁrst and tried to hide his face, but
seeing Balarama to be quite sincere and totally unsuspicious of his identity,
he gathered his wandering wits together and proceeded to act the part of a
true sannyasi. Balarama went off, well pleased with his latest ﬁnd, and
returned later, dragging a reluctant Krishna with him. The latter gave him a
piercing look. Arjuna felt himself to be quite exposed and hurriedly closed
his eyes so as not to see any more of those baleful looks. Balarama humbly
requested the holy one to spend the rainy season at their residence. The only
time a sannyasi was allowed to live in a householder’s home was during the
time of the monsoons, when the rains made it impossible for him to sleep in
the open. Arjuna gave a quick glance at Krishna and acceded to the request.
“O Brother! Beware of bringing strange young men into our house, even
though they may profess to be sannyasis. Our sister is a young girl of
marriageable age. You know how I feel about such young sannyasis;  they
are not to be trusted. They are not old enough to have renounced the
pleasures of life. Think well before inviting him to our house.” Though
Krishna spoke in a low voice, it was at just the correct pitch to penetrate the
sannyasi’s ears. Arjuna hurriedly closed his eyes and recommenced the
chanting he had interrupted in order to hear what Krishna was whispering.
“Aum Namashivaya,” he said loudly, “Aum Namashivaya,” and gave a
quick look at Krishna to see how he was taking it. Krishna merely gave him
a quizzical look. Balarama glared at his younger brother and told him to
mind his manners. He bowed low at Arjuna’s feet and begged his
permission to leave. Now the ﬁeld was clear for Krishna. The sannyasi
opened one eye slightly and, ﬁnding a blue patch in front of him, hurriedly
closed it again and once more started chanting Aum Namashivaya, the
mantra of the great Lord Shiva, in a loud voice.
He felt a tap on his shoulder, which could not be ignored. He opened his
eyes again cautiously to ﬁnd himself alone with Krishna. The crowd had
dispersed, and Krishna gave him a charming, reassuring smile.
“Well, my dear friend,” he said, “I hadn’t realized that you had taken to
the holy life. Why did you suddenly decide on such a course, my dear boy?
Did something happen to give you a distaste for life? I heard that you had
gone on a pilgrimage for a year, but I never dreamed it was for life.”
“O! You recognized me!” Arjuna said with relief, for he was ﬁnding the
strain of impersonation too much to bear, coupled with the mental agony of
thinking of Subhadra’s approaching nuptials. “It was just a joke,” he said
feebly, as he caught Krishna’s mocking glance.
“Whatever it is, I would seriously advise you to buy some saffron dye
from the market and take up sannyasa (the life of renunciation) in earnest.
That appears to be the only way to cure your malady.” With this cryptic
remark, Krishna left Arjuna.
Arjuna cogitated for some time. He had ﬁnally decided to leave the city
and not accept Balarama’s hospitality, for he feared that he would be
exposed, but after listening to Krishna’s advice, he decided otherwise. What
had he meant by asking him to take up sannyasa seriously? Did he mean
that his case was hopeless and he had better renounce the world? Surely that
could not have been his meaning, for sannyasa was not a thing to be bought
with a packet of dye from the market. So Krishna must have some devious
plan that necessitated his carrying on with the deception. Whatever it was,
Arjuna had implicit faith in the Lord, so he set out to deck himself as a true
sannyasi, complete with freshly dyed saffron robes and a rosary made of
rudraksha beads around his neck, with another tucked away in a little bag,
in which his right hand was always hidden, while he was supposedly
muttering his prayers on the beads. This little bag was essential to the
success of his plan, for it was obvious to the most casual look that his hands
were not those of a true sannyasi, who would be expected to have a callused
middle ﬁnger caused by the constant repetition of countless beads being
rolled over it. Arjuna, on the other hand, had a callused foreﬁnger, as
beﬁtting an archer. Thus armed, he was taken in state to the palace, where
Subhadra herself was given the pleasant task of catering to the holy one’s
needs. It was considered very lucky for a young girl to get the blessings of a
holy man, especially in order to procure a good husband and many sons,
both of which Arjuna was perfectly capable of and willing to bless her with!
Needless to say, Arjuna reveled in this bit of unexpected luck. With open
eyes, he watched her beauteous form as she undulated in and out of the
room, carrying out her self-appointed tasks of cleaning his room, bringing
his food, and so on. When she left him, he meditated with closed eyes on
her form. Subhadra, too, had her own suspicions about the sannyasi from
the very ﬁrst day. The way he patted her head when she prostrated before
him was far from being paternal. She watched him closely, and though he
took care to hide his right hand, she discovered that his left hand also had a
callused foreﬁnger. She knew well that it was only Arjuna who could have
it, for he was famous for his ambidexterity and could shoot equally well
with his left hand as with his right. After this discovery, she became a little
more bashful, but even more eager to serve the handsome young sannyasi.
Thus, the courtship progressed smoothly during the four months of the
monsoon.
With the end of the rains, the wedding season would commence, so
Krishna had to devise a plan to remove Balarama from the vicinity for a
while. It so happened that Balarama went to inquire about the discovery of
an ancient temple on top of a hill, and Krishna announced to Arjuna that a
chariot with his own four horses would be stationed at the palace gates to
take Subhadra for a religious function. He also hinted that an opportunity
once lost may never return. Arjuna, who was never slow on the uptake, lost
no time in grabbing the hand of the willing Subhadra, who just happened to
come into the room at that time. He hurried her quite unresistingly into the
chariot and whipped up the horses.
The news of the sannyasi’s abduction of his sister was carried to
Balarama, who returned at once from the renovation site. Without waiting
to consult Krishna, he sent off some soldiers after the erring couple. Since
the sannyasi was not expected to carry any weapons, he thought the capture
would be an easy matter. But he had reckoned without his sister’s foresight.
Not for nothing was she the sister of such valiant brothers! Taking over the
job of driving the chariot, she gave Arjuna the bow and arrows that she had
concealed, with which he managed to stall the pursuing soldiers.
In the meantime, Balarama stalked into the palace and demanded an
explanation from Krishna. He was chagrined to ﬁnd his brother innocently
engaged in a game of dice. He could not believe that such a thing could
have happened without his knowledge, if not his connivance.
“Did I not warn you, my dear brother, of the dangers of allowing strange
young men into our house when our sister was here? But you refused to
listen to me. Now why do you blame me?” asked the Lord, with an innocent
look.
Balarama ranted and raved, for his temper was not improved by hearing
this truth. He swore to kill the sannyasi with his bare hands. At last, Krishna
took pity on him and disclosed the sannyasi’s identity.
“Why didn’t you tell me this from the ﬁrst? Why do you go about
everything in this devious fashion?” Balarama asked.
“Well, Brother,” Krishna replied reasonably, “had I told you of Arjuna’s
liking for Subhadra, you would immediately have asked me to mind my
own business, for you had already arranged for her marriage with
Duryodhana. You would not have been able to go back on your word. I
knew that Subhadra also was keen on marrying Arjuna. In this way, you are
completely clear of all blame, since you knew nothing about it. Duryodhana
can ﬁnd no fault with you for having broken your word.”
Balarama’s anger was appeased when he heard this, and he decided to
make the best of a bad job. The couple was brought back, and the wedding
celebrated at Dwaraka itself. Krishna accompanied them back to
Indraprastha with a huge dowry of gold, horses, and servants. His parting
words to his sister were, “I suppose I can take away my chariot, since you
have no more use of it!” Subhadra blushed and thanked her enigmatic
brother, to whom the whole of life was one big game.
In the course of time, Subhadra bore a son to Arjuna, the great
Abhimanyu, who was equal to his father in valor and expertise in archery.
She laughs because she gets embarrassed when she looks upon her
lover,
I n many ways she utters senseless sounds through the fever of her
love,
A certain girl ex celling in her charms unrivaled, dallies with the
enemy of Madhu.
FROM GI TA GOVI NDA BY J AYADEVA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Srinivasaya Namaha!
1 7
T he Divine H usband
Twam E va Matha cha Pitha Twam E va,
Twam E va Bandhuscha Sakha Twam E va,
Twam E va Vidya Dravinam Twam E va,
Twam E va Sarvam Mama Deva Deva.
Thou art my father as well as my mother,
Thou alone, my relation and only friend.
Thou art my knowledge as well as my sole wealth,
Thou art my everything, O thou Lord of Lords.
The remaining marriages of Krishna took place soon after this incident.
Mitrabinda, the princess of Avanti, was his cousin. Her brothers, Vinda and
Anuvinda, had studied with him at Sandipani’s ashrama, but now they had
come under J arasandha’s inﬂuence and were forcing their sister to marry his
grandson. She begged Krishna to rescue her, and once again, in the face of
all the other kings, Krishna abducted her as he had done Rukmini.
Bhadra was also a cousin. She was offered in marriage to him by her
brothers. This was the only marriage that took place without any untoward
incident! Satya was the daughter of Nagnajit, king of Kosala. He had
declared that only the person who was capable of subduing his seven
vicious bulls at the same time would be allowed to marry her. Hearing of
her love for him, Krishna went to Ayodhya, the capital of the Kosalas, to try
for her hand. Nagnajit was a very pious man and felt honored that the Lord
had come to win his daughter. He would willingly have given her in
marriage to him, but since he had already issued such an edict, he could not
go back on his word. Hearing this, the Lord girded up his loins and entered
the arena into which the wild bulls had been let loose. Multiplying himself
into seven forms, he subdued the bulls simultaneously with the greatest of
ease. The king happily bestowed his daughter on the Lord, and the marriage
was celebrated at the bride’s residence. Many of the kings who failed to
gain Satya as their bride now came to attack the bridal party on its way to
Dwaraka. Arjuna, who was accompanying the Lord, routed all of them with
ease.
Lakshmana was the beautiful daughter of the king of Madra. He held a
swayamvara for her with a contest similar to the one held at the Draupadi
swayamvara. Krishna attended, accompanied by Arjuna, since Lakshmana
had begged him to come to her rescue. He shot down the whirling ﬁsh with
ease and took her away in the face of stiff opposition from the other kings.
At that time, a mighty king called Bhauma, or Narakasura, had been
terrorizing the neighboring states. He had captured the daughters of sixteen
thousand kings, all of marriageable age, and clapped them in jail as a kindly
precaution, he said, against would-be abductors like Krishna! What he did
not realize was that the damsels were longing to be abducted and had sent
Krishna a piteous plea for help. At the same time, Indra, the king of the
gods, approached Krishna to solicit his aid in killing Narakasura. Not
content with stealing damsels, Narakasura had gone to heaven and helped
himself to the earrings of Aditi, Indra’s mother, which had miraculous
powers. This complaint had barely been registered when Varuna, the god of
waters, added to the list of Narakasura’s iniquities. Having paid a visit to
Varuna, he could not resist ﬁlching Varuna’s umbrella, which had
remarkable properties. He had also occupied Indra’s seat on top of the
mountain, Meru. The complaints against him seemed to be piling up, so
Krishna decided to take prompt action.
In the meantime, the sage Narada had brought a ﬂower from the celestial
tree, the Parijata, from Indra’s garden and presented it to Rukmini.
Immediately upon seeing it, Satyabhama wanted nothing less than the
whole tree for her garden, so she went off to ﬁnd her Lord who was in
conference with Indra. She considered this a good omen, so she whispered
to the Lord her desire to have a sapling from the celestial tree. Krishna
agreed, provided Indra had no objection, and Indra cordially invited them
both to come to heaven after Krishna had defeated Narakasura and regained
his mother’s earrings.
The Lord set out for Pragjyotisha, Narakasura’s capital, mounted on his
eagle vehicle and accompanied by his wife Satyabhama. The city was
fortiﬁed by several layers of barriers, consisting of mountain ranges, water,
ﬁre, and a cyclonic wind. Within that was a moat in which lived the demon
Murasura, who had encircled the moat with cords that no one could break
through. Krishna shattered the external fortiﬁcations of mountains with his
mace, water and ﬁre with his discus, and the weapons of the sentries with
his arrows. He also shattered the courage of Narakasura’s warriors with the
powerful sound of his conch, the Panchajanya. Murasura rushed out at
Krishna with his three-pronged trident upraised. He hurled it at Garuda, and
Krishna broke the trident with three arrows. Murasura hurled his mace at
him, which was also shattered by the Lord. At last, bereft of weapons, he
rushed at him as if to throttle him with his bare hands and had his head cut
off by the Lord’s discus, the Sudarshana. Seeing all his barricades broken
and his leader slain, Narakasura came out with his elephant brigade.
Thereupon there ensued a terriﬁc battle between the two, which ended in
Narakasura’s head being cut off by the Sudarshana. His mother, the Earth
deity, then presented the Lord the earrings, umbrella, and other precious
articles that her son had stolen. She knew of Krishna’s greatness, and she
extolled him and begged him to spare the life of her grandson Bhagadatta.
Krishna acceded to this request, made a triumphal entry into the prosperous
city of Pragjyotisha, and released the sixteen thousand young women whom
Narakasura had taken away by force. As soon as they saw him, they
mentally resolved to wed none but him, so Krishna accepted all of them and
sent them to Dwaraka to await his arrival.
Next, he proceeded to Indra’s celestial abode and restored Aditi’s earrings
and Varuna’s umbrella. As soon as Satyabhama saw the celestial tree with
its golden bark and intoxicating perfume, she clung to Krishna’s arm and
begged him not to forget his promise to get the tree for her. The Lord
looked at her pityingly, as if to say, “O Bhama, how foolish you are. Having
procured me, the essence of sweetness, do you crave for this petty tree,
which can grant you only worldly pleasures?” But she was adamant, so he
gave in to her request. So also, when we ask the Lord for childish triﬂes that
are pleasant to the senses but have no lasting beneﬁt, the Lord may yield,
for the power of prayer is great, and every individual is given the freedom
to carve out his own future. Eventually, we will ﬁnd that the gift is a
worthless one and will bring us nothing but sorrow. Thus, each one of us
has the voice of God within our hearts, but if we disregard it, he may appear
to give in, not because he is too weak to stop us, but because we are given
the freedom to choose, and according to our choice, we have to accept the
consequences.
So Krishna reminded Indra of his promise, but that foolish deity
conveniently forgot his obligations once he had what he wanted, like most
of us, and sent his forces to ﬁght with Krishna! The Lord defeated them and
returned to Dwaraka with the delighted Satyabhama carrying her trophy. At
Dwaraka, he married the sixteen thousand princesses in as many palaces,
taking on as many forms at the same time. They were housed in their own
special mansions so that there would be no complaints.
As soon as Satyabhama reached her own home, she decided to plant her
treasure. The spot chosen was directly beside the wall separating her
residence from that of Rukmini, so that her rival would have clear proof of
her Lord’s preference for her! J ust then, the sage Narada arrived on the
scene and offered to plant it for her since he was well versed in the method
of planting celestial trees, being a resident of those regions. Narada had a
decided partiality for the modest and unassuming Rukmini. The outcome of
his horticultural activities was that, when the tree grew and started
ﬂowering, Bhama found to her dismay that all the branches hung over the
wall into Rukmini’s garden. The ﬂowers fell in profusion and carpeted
Rukmini’s compound, perfuming the entire atmosphere. If Satyabhama
wanted even a single ﬂower, she had to beg for one from her rival. So,
while she had all the troublesome tasks of watering and manuring and
pruning the tree, Rukmini could sit back and enjoy the perfume of the
ﬂowers, which literally fell into her lap. Thus, Rukmini, who thought that
there was no perfume comparable to the one emanating from the lotus feet
of her Lord, was drenched in celestial fragrance, whereas Bhama, who
craved for other excitement, was left bereft.
Once, the sage Narada, who was a celibate himself, had a doubt as to how
the Lord treated his 16,108 and how they looked upon him. The thought of
keeping even one wife seemed a burden to him, so how did Krishna manage
to please all his wives and yet ﬁnd time for all his other activities? One day,
he decided to ﬁnd out for himself. Armed with his vina, or lute, he visited
his favorite, Rukmini. There he found Krishna relaxing on the swing bed,
with Rukmini fanning him. Krishna jumped up as soon as he saw the sage
and welcomed him and pressed him to partake of some fruits and nuts.
Narada sat for a while and then departed, for he still had 16,107 houses to
visit. He stepped into Satyabhama’s house next. Here he found Krishna
engrossed in a game of dice with her. He was steadily losing and as soon as
he saw the sage, he jumped up, upsetting the board, and welcomed him with
open arms. “Ah, Narada! How long is it since we met! How are you and
where are you coming from?”
Narada’s jaw dropped, for had they not met but a moment ago? He hastily
extricated himself from the Lord’s embrace and withdrew to J ambavati’s
house. Here he found that even the season had changed. While it was still
spring at the other two palaces, it was summer here, and the two of them
were sporting in the lake to get cool. The same tableau was enacted here—
Krishna pretending surprise at seeing him and Narada feeling nervous and
abashed. Poor Narada stuck to his selﬁmposed task and climbed in and out
of any number of palaces. In each of them, he was met by a smiling Krishna
and a devoted, happy, and contented wife, both of them seemingly
enthralled with each other’s company! Though each of his wives had a
hundred maids as her personal attendants, every one of them preferred to
attend on Krishna by herself. At every place, Narada noticed that each of
the queens personally catered to all Krishna’s wants. As soon as he came in,
they would offer him arghya and water to wash his feet, prepare his food,
massage his feet, fan him, apply sandal paste and unguents over his body,
decorate him with ﬂower garlands made with their own hands, comb and
arrange his hair, and even feed him. All of them told Narada that they
considered themselves more in the capacity of his maid than his wife. They
delighted in doing the most menial services for him. By the end of the day,
Narada had lost count of the number of palaces he had climbed in and out
of. Exhausted, he decided to give up his futile pastime of trying to plumb
the depths of the Lord’s glory. In a mood of repentance, he ﬂung himself
beneath a tree to rest, when he suddenly found a man bearing down on him.
“Hail, O sage!” said the man, who was swaddled in a cloak. “Have you
given up so easily? Why do not you ﬁnish the task you have set yourself?
You have exactly 465 houses more to visit!”
So saying, the man disappeared, and Narada thought he heard a delighted
chuckle near him. He stood up with both hands clasped and mentally
prostrated 16,108 times to the Lord for having doubted him and dared to
test him.
“Forgive me,” he whispered. “You are the sum total of all. Everything
exists in you. How then would you ﬁnd it difﬁcult to be in as many places
as you like at the same time?”
It may be impossible for a human being to keep so many women happy,
but for God nothing is impossible. J ust because he was a sage and a realized
soul, Narada saw that he had no greater claim on him than his wives, who
worshipped him with their bodies, minds, and souls.
Of all Krishna’s wives, there was none so sweet and docile as Rukmini.
She was Lakshmi Devi incarnate, the consort of Lord Vishnu. She was the
ideal Aryan wife, asking for nothing, demanding nothing, ﬁnding her
greatest happiness in the service of her husband, who was also her Lord and
God. At no time in her life had she ever opposed his wishes or in any way
expressed her opinions at variance with his, as the headstrong Satyabhama
was wont to do. One day, the Lord decided to gauge the placidity of the
calm lake of her mind by dropping a pebble of discontent into it. Was it as
calm at the bottom as it appeared on the surface, or were the storms of
passion lurking below?
One afternoon, he was resting on the swing bed with Rukmini gently
fanning him and deriving immense pleasure from this small service. She
presented a picture of rare beauty as she stood beside the Lord. Her jeweled
anklets made a sweet, tinkling sound as she moved about, and her bangles
kept time with the movement of the gently waving fan. Seeing her looking
so lovely and serene, the Lord said, with a mischievous smile, “O princess,
many a ruler who was equal in wealth to the divinities, who was as noble,
as charming, and as endowed with looks, generosity, strength, and valor
came to your swayamvara, including Shishupala, the prince of Chedi.
Without caring for any of them, why did you choose me, who am inferior to
them in all things, who has taken up shelter in the middle of the sea out of
fear, who has abandoned all claims to the royal throne, and whose way of
life is steeped in mystery and transcends the ways of the world? I am one
without any possessions and am fond of those with nothing. Therefore, O
beautiful one, wealthy people do not seek my favor. Marriage and
friendship should only be between people who are compatible in respect to
birth, wealth, and position. Therefore, O princess of Vidarbha, if it was
without knowledge of these failings that you chose to marry me, then it is
still not too late for you to seek some noble Kshatriya prince like
Shishupala, who will be a real match for you and enable you to fulﬁll your
aspirations in this world and the next. I took you by force, only to destroy
the pride of those evil kings. We who are established in the equilibrium of
wisdom have no need for women, offspring, or wealth. We are ever satisﬁed
with the bliss of the atman, the true self, and we act the role of the
uninvolved witness in the affairs of the world.”
At the beginning of this unprovoked attack, Rukmini had looked up
startled, wondering what she had done to provoke this tirade. But as the
harangue continued unabated, her lips started quivering, her eyes ﬁlled with
tears, and a terrible sorrow clutched at her heart and threatened to tear it
apart. Any minute now, she expected to hear the fateful words banishing her
from his divine presence, forbidding her ever to return again. The ﬁnal
straw was the mention of the hateful word Shishupala. If there was anyone
whom the gentle princess detested, it was the prince of Chedi. Her tender
heart could bear no more. Her bangles slipped off her limp arms, and
without a sound, she crumpled to the ground. Seeing this drastic reaction to
his teasing, the Lord jumped up from the cot, lifted her up tenderly,
massaged her face with his lotus palms, did everything to bring her back to
consciousness, and then proceeded to soothe and pacify her. At last, her
lovely eyes ﬂuttered open.
“O beautiful one,” he said, “do not be angry with me. I was only teasing
you for the pleasure of hearing your reply. Differences of opinion happen in
all marriages. In fact, that is the only gain to be had from marriage. What
you should have done was to defend yourself against my unjust accusations,
and then we could have spent a happy hour arguing and quarreling with
each other, as all husbands and wives do. I never expected you to take my
teasing so seriously and certainly never expected you to swoon.” Thus he
comforted her and tenderly kissed away her tears. At last, with heaving
breasts and smothered sobs, Rukmini spoke.
“I ﬁnd no pleasure in anything but your service, O Lord,” she said with
quivering lips. “Your smiles, your glances, your commands—these
constitute my life breath, and if I cannot have these, I would rather die.”
Then, taking up each of the points that he had declared to be detrimental to
him, she pointed out that these very points were a matter of pride to her.
“O lotus-eyed Lord! What you said about my not being a ﬁtting match for
you is indeed true. For where are you, the all-pervading being, the master of
all powers and excellence, and where am I, a creature constituted of the
three gunas? It is true that you have taken your residence in the deep sea,
for you are the pure consciousness that is ever resident in the ocean of our
hearts. Your ways are mysterious and no doubt none can conceive of them.
You are indeed a pauper, for there is nothing outside you that you can
possess. You are the embodiment of all values. Men abandon everything the
world prizes to follow you. These are the noble ones with whom you have
afﬁnity. That is a true marriage, when a person attains union with you. This
is only a relationship of the body. It was by hearing of your greatness from
the ascetics who have no possession but you that I came to love you,
rejecting all lesser mortals. Having driven away the assembled kings by a
mere twang of your bow, you took me away, for I am your rightful property.
Who is the woman with even a modicum of sense who would go after a
man, who is nothing but a walking corpse, in preference to you, who are the
abode of all excellence? Who is the woman who will care to leave you,
after having once experienced the perfume of your lotus feet, the abode of
Lakshmi, the goddess of fortune? I have sought shelter in you, the Lord of
all the worlds, the Paramatma, and the one who fulﬁlls all the aspirations of
everyone, here and in the hereafter, for you are the only match for me. (The
Paramatma is the only match for the jivatma.) Revolving as I am in this
cycle of birth and death, may your feet be my shelter, your feet that destroy
the false identiﬁcation of the body with the spirit and that remains ever,
with the devotee as his sole support, in the ocean of samsara. Only those
women who are steeped in ignorance and who have never known the
fragrance of your lotus feet would go after human husbands, who are
nothing but corpses clad in skin and bones and ﬂesh.”
Rukmini’s sentiments are those that have been felt by many women, like
Mirabai, who have given their hearts over to the Lord. After having married
the Lord within their hearts, the thought of touching another man becomes
abhorrent to them. Shunned by their husbands, scorned by their relatives,
and condemned by society, they are helpless and can only remain true to the
ideal cherished within their hearts. One who has known pure gold can never
be satisﬁed with dross.
The Lord said, “O noble one! It was only to hear these words of yours
that I teased you. It would be difﬁcult to ﬁnd even one household with a
wife like you. Your single-minded devotion and dedication to me shall go
uncompensated, for they are too noble and pure to be rewarded by anything
I can do for you.” Thus, he blessed and comforted her. This small episode in
the life of the Lord shows how he played the role of the typical householder
to perfection, as he played every other role.
A cure unfailing, O moon-faced one, is the nectar of your lips.
FROM GI TA GOVI NDA BY J AYADEVA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Sattwathaam Pathaye Namaha!
1 8
T he Sons of  Krishna
Chintayami Harimeva santhatham,
Mandamandahasithananambujam,
Nandagopathanayam Parathparam,
Naradadi Munivrindavanditham.
I constantly contemplate on Krishna, the one who attracts all, whose
face, with the gentle smile playing over it, is as charming as a lotus
ﬂower in bloom, and who transcends the relationship of cause and
effect. Yet who lived as the son of Nanda and was worshipped by
ascetics like Narada.
The wives of Krishna considered themselves his servants and bowed to him
in all things, but the devotion of the gopis of Vrindavana was even higher in
quality, for they gave their devotion with no hope of reward. Radha, in
particular, was the outstanding example. Many are the stories told of her
association with the Lord while at Vrindavana. She was supposed to be very
high spirited, like Satyabhama, and she had many tiffs with the Lord when
she found him dallying with the other gopis. Like all women, she wanted
him wholly for herself, and he wanted to teach her the lesson that he
belonged to all. Anyone who called to him with love was showered with his
grace. Thus, during the short term of his stay at Vrindavana, he cleansed her
of the dross of selﬁshness, so that at last her love was burnished, like pure
gold. It had to stand the test of a physical parting from him, and this she
could do only because she was spiritually one with him. Neither space nor
time could alter the perfection of their relationship. His wives could hardly
come up to this standard, and they had always been curious about Radha,
for they had heard much about her. Even Uddhava never tired of singing her
praises. At last, at their earnest request, the Lord decided to invite her to
Dwaraka for a day. He warned his wives that she should be treated on a par
with him, for she was a part of him and any slight to her would be
tantamount to a slight to him. They agreed to everything and eagerly looked
forward to meeting her.
One day she arrived, escorted by her companions, looking like a wild rose
transplanted from its natural habitat to the artiﬁcial glitter of court life.
Though the others felt shy and strange, she herself seemed oblivious to the
strangeness of her surroundings until her eyes fell on Krishna. Then she
gave a cry of delight and rushed forward without any inhibitions and ﬂung
herself into his welcoming arms! The others watched in astonishment. Even
Satyabhama, the boldest of them, never presumed to do anything like this in
public. Krishna was not a whit embarrassed. He returned her embrace,
gently led her around the palace, and introduced her to his wives, who had
all lined up to meet her. Then he left her in Rukmini’s charge, for he
realized that his wives were longing to have her to themselves in order to
question her, and they dared not do it in front of him.
They found her to be naï ve and childlike. She was quite unimpressed by
the wonders of the city or the palace. Her lovely face became animated only
when Krishna’s name was mentioned or any of his exploits repeated. At
last, they gave up trying to interest her in the various aspects of palace life
and sat down and talked about him, who was uppermost in all their minds.
Then Radha was blissfully happy. Like a yogi, her mind was totally
unattracted by the external world and reveled only in the Lord. They spent
the whole day happily listening to his exploits in Gokula and Vrindavana.
At night, Rukmini led her to her room and put her to bed as tenderly as she
would a child. Then she brought a cup of hot milk and placed it beside her
bed, warning her to be careful when she drank it, since it was very hot. But
Radha, of course, lived in her own world and gulped the milk down without
even realizing how hot it was. Rukmini next went to the Lord’s room to see
to his needs before he slept and found him massaging his throat.
“What is it, Lord? What has happened to your throat?” she enquired. The
Lord smiled and said, “The hot milk you gave to Radha has burned my
throat, though it would not have harmed her. She has drowned her separate
individuality in me and so she is ever protected, but I feel her pain, for I am
enshrined in her heart.”
Rukmini stood aghast. Now she began to have a glimmer of the greatness
of Radha and the greatness of Krishna, who could feel the pain of his
devotees. No tear could be shed by them, without his feeling the prick in his
own eyes. The devotee, on the other hand, who is ever immersed in him,
feels no pain at all.
Radha is a picture of the soul who is ever immersed in divine love. Like a
lamp burning in a sheltered place, the ﬁre of her love burned steadily for the
Lord alone. Having once experienced the bliss of atmic realization in the
episode of the Rasalila, she could no longer ﬁnd joy in the pleasures of the
mundane world, just as the yogi ﬁnds no amusement in the joys of the
senses. To the one who has drowned in the ocean of bliss, the pleasures of
the world appear like the toys of childhood. Radha returned to Vrindavana,
there to meditate on her Lord until the end of her earthly life, as did the rest
of the gopis.
For ﬁve years after his marriage to Rukmini, Krishna did not have any
children. Understanding her disappointment, he placated Lord Shiva and
was blessed with his eldest son, Pradyumna. Lord Vishnu had only one son,
Manmatha, the god of love. He had been reduced to ashes in the ﬂame of
Lord Shiva’s wrath for having dared to interrupt his tapasya. This he did to
help Parvati win Shiva as her husband. Rathi, the wife of Manmatha, had
begged Lord Shiva to grant the life of her husband, but she had been told to
incarnate on Earth and await the arrival of Manmatha. This is why Krishna
had to placate Lord Shiva, who relented, and Manmatha was born as
Pradyumna, the eldest son of Rukmini. But Rukmini was unable to enjoy
her baby, for he was stolen in infancy by Sambasura, the sworn enemy of
Manmatha. Sambasura threw the baby into the sea and thought he had seen
the last of him. But a huge ﬁsh swallowed the babe and was caught by a
ﬁsherman, who brought the ﬁsh to the kitchen of Sambasura himself, where
Manmatha’s wife, Rathi, had already incarnated herself as Maya Devi, his
cook. She had been told by the sage Narada to expect her husband in this
miraculous way. So she cut open the ﬁsh very carefully, rescued the
beautiful baby from inside, and brought him up tenderly. When Pradyumna
came of age, he found his supposed mother behaving toward him more in
the manner of a wife than a mother, and he asked her the reason for this
change. She told him the whole story and handed over to him the divine
weapons she had been keeping. Armed with these, he defeated Sambasura,
and the couple returned to Dwaraka. Rukmini’s heart leaped with joy when
she beheld the handsome young man who had entered the court with a lady.
Though she had never set eyes on him since birth, she felt strongly attracted
to him, and she begged Krishna to ﬁnd out who he was. The whole story
was then narrated by the sage Narada, and the couple was welcomed with
great joy.
Each of the wives of Krishna is said to have given birth to ten sons. Each
of them thought herself to be his favorite, for he always seemed to be with
her in her palace. Only a few of them realized that he was ever immersed in
his own inherent bliss and his mind was never entangled with any of them.
Like an actor playing a role in a drama, he played the role of a husband to
all these countless ladies. Despite all their amorous devices, they failed to
capture his mind.
Pradyumna also married Rukmi’s daughter, Rukmavati, and had a son
called Aniruddha by her. Rukmi, who was Rukmini’s brother, had sworn
never to enter his own city until he had defeated Krishna, who had abducted
his sister. He had built another city at Bhojakata and was staying there,
biding his chance to get even with Krishna. At the swayamvara that he had
arranged for his daughter Rukmavati, Pradyumna enacted the same scene
that his father had done years ago and abducted the bride. When
Pradyumna’s son Aniruddha grew up, he married Rukmi’s granddaughter,
Rochana. On the auspicious occasion of this wedding, Krishna, Balarama,
Rukmini, Samba, Pradyumna, and many others went to Bhojakata, since a
sort of truce had been declared.
After the wedding, Rukmi challenged Balarama to a game of dice. In the
course of the game, Rukmi started insulting the Yadavas as being mere
cowherds. Rukmi was also caught cheating at dice. Inﬂamed by this,
Balarama hurled his mace at him and killed him. In the pandemonium that
followed, Krishna alone remained silent, for he had promised Rukmini that
he would not harm her relatives. Thus, the wedding ended in confusion, and
the Yadavas returned with Aniruddha and his bride Rochana.
The romantic story of how Aniruddha married Usha, the daughter of
Banasura, is well worth narrating. The latter was the son of Mahabali, who
had once offered Earth as a gift to Lord Vishnu, in his avatara as Vamana,
the dwarf man. Banasura was a great devotee of Lord Shiva and lived in the
beautiful city of Sonita. He had a thousand arms, with which he used to play
a thousand instruments for Lord Shiva when he danced the tandava (Shiva’s
cosmic dance). Shiva asked him to choose any boon, and Banasura chose
that Shiva himself should come and guard his city. He was very proud of his
own strength, as well as the fact that he was being guarded by Shiva.
Banasura found his thousand arms were proving a burden to him, as they
were itching to ﬁght with someone, but in all the three worlds he could ﬁnd
no worthy opponent. Shiva was amused to hear this and told him that an
opponent worthy of his mettle would be in the ofﬁng if ever he found his
ﬂagstaff broken.
Banasura had a most attractive daughter called Usha. Her favorite
companion was the minister’s daughter, Chitralekha, who was an expert
artist as well as an exponent of yoga. One day, Usha had a graphic dream in
which she met a handsome prince and fell in love with him. The experience
of the dream was so vivid that she lost interest in everything else and started
pining for her dream lover. Chitralekha, seeing her in this sorry state,
demanded to know the reason. When she heard the story, she told Usha not
to feel disheartened and that she would paint portraits of all the eligible
princes of the realm with her remarkable gift. Thus, she started painting
portraits of the princes of each of the great royal families. At last, when she
came to the Yadavas, Usha started to show signs of animation. When she
saw Krishna’s and Pradyumna’s portraits she became quite excited, for the
likeness to her dream prince was unmistakable. At last, when Aniruddha’s
handsome countenance appeared under Chitralekha’s skillful ﬁngers, her
joy knew no bounds. But when she heard who he was, she fell into gloom
once more, for she feared her father would never agree to the match. But
Chitralekha was a resourceful girl. She told Usha to go to bed with a happy
heart, and exerting her yogic powers, Chitralekha went to Dwaraka and
wafted the sleeping Aniruddha in the middle of the night into Usha’s arms.
When he woke up, he proved to be most cooperative in acceding to their
wishes that he should wed Usha in private, for he too had been dreaming of
her for the past few days. Thus, they got married, and he lived in her
quarters in secret, enjoying a blissful honeymoon. This idyllic state of
affairs, however, could not last long. Usha started showing signs of
pregnancy. Her father soon came to hear of this. He invaded his daughter’s
private apartments, discovered the handsome stranger, and had him forcibly
clapped in jail, despite Aniruddha’s resistance and Usha’s pleas.
In Dwaraka, Aniruddha’s relatives wondered about his disappearance. As
usual, the sage Narada came to the rescue and informed them of his
whereabouts. The Yadavas, headed by Krishna, went on a rescue operation
to Sonitapura. They laid waste the gardens surrounding the city, which
infuriated Banasura and intrigued him also, since he found his ﬂagstaff
broken. Accompanied by Lord Shiva seated on his bull vehicle, Banasura
went to meet the Yadavas, and there ensued a tremendous battle between
Hara and Hari—Shiva and Krishna—that was thrilling to behold. The Lord
cut off Banasura’s numerous arms one by one, like lopping off the branches
of a tree. At last, when he had only four left, Shiva intervened and begged
Krishna to spare the life of his devotee. Krishna stopped the ﬁght, spared
Banasura, and told him that a devotee of Shiva would have nothing to fear
from him. Banasura released Aniruddha and happily gave his daughter
Usha to him, and the Yadavas returned back in triumph.
The Lord’s victory over Shiva is the culmination of his victories over the
ancient gods. His ﬁrst was with Brahma (god of creation) in the incident of
the cows and the gopalas;  next over Indra (king of the gods) during the
uplifting of the Govardhana Mountain, as well as procuring the celestial
tree;  over Varuna (god of the oceans) in the rescuing of his father from the
waters;  over Manmatha (god of love) during the Rasalila;  over Agni during
the drinking of the forest ﬁre;  over Kubera (god of wealth) at the defeating
of Sankachuda;  over the Vidyadharas at the release of the snake
Sudarshana;  and now over Shiva in the war with Banasura. Thus, the
superiority of Krishna over the ancient Vedic gods was established during
the Krishnavatara.
At different periods of history we ﬁnd different gods taking precedence,
and this has led to many misconceptions and factions within the fold of the
Hindu religion itself. The Lord himself says that he manifests himself from
age to age and that every incarnation is adapted to suit the needs of the
particular age. In the Kali Yuga, or Iron Age, in which we are living now,
the path of bhakti, or devotion, is advocated and the main propagator of this
path is Lord Krishna himself. That is why in this age he is exalted above the
other gods.
Krishna’s eldest son by J ambavati was called Samba. He was the
incarnation of Skanda, the general of the gods. He had heard of the famous
capture of Rukmini by his father, and he decided to emulate his example.
The bride chosen by him was Lakshmana, the daughter of Duryodhana by
his wife Bhanumathi. Neither father nor daughter had so far shown any
inclination toward such a union, but Samba did not let such a slight thing
deter him in his ambition. He went uninvited to the swayamvara and made
off with the bride. This was a common occurrence in those days, as has
been seen. But Samba had gone alone and had not reckoned with
Duryodhana, who had no desire to have his daughter abducted, least of all
by a member of the Yadava clan. He promptly caught Samba and clapped
him in jail to cool his ardor. Hearing of the ignominious ending of his son’s
romance, Krishna decided to go himself. He was stopped by Balarama, who
said that Krishna was incapable of dealing politely with Duryodhana, who,
being Balarama’s disciple, would listen to whatever he said. Krishna
laughed at this false reading of Duryodhana’s character but allowed his
brother to have his own way.
Balarama went to Hastinapura and demanded an audience with
Duryodhana in the garden outside the palace. When Duryodhana came to
the garden, out of respect for his tutor, Balarama ordered him to free his
nephew, Samba. Duryodhana grew furious at this command. “What!” he
roared. “Has the jackal started commanding the lion? Since when have you
cowherds become daring enough to command me, the king of the Kurus?
Who are these Yadavas? Upstarts, all of them, led by the cowherd Krishna.
Everyone knows he ﬂed in terror of J arasandha and is now hiding at
Dwaraka, where he knows J arasandha cannot penetrate!”
Saying this, he strode off angrily. Hardly had he reached the palace, when
he found the entire city of Hastinapura shaking and quivering as if in the
throes of some mortal agony. Balarama had not said a word in reply, but he
was boiling with rage. Without a word, he had gone to the city walls and
had placed his favorite weapon, the ploughshare, beneath the ramparts and
was slowly uprooting the entire city and tipping it into the Ganga.
Duryodhana was brought to a sudden realization of the folly of his rash
words, and he rushed back to placate Balarama. When the angry giant had
been appeased, Duryodhana took him back in state to the city, released
Samba, and got him married to his daughter Lakshmana. He sent them back
with many horses, carriages, and ornaments, as beﬁtting a princess of the
Kurus.
One day, Krishna’s sons, Pradyumna, Banu, Samba, and Charu, had gone
to the outer gardens of the city in search of some new source of amusement.
Feeling thirsty, they approached a well in the hope of ﬁnding some water,
but the well was quite dry. However, right at the bottom they noticed a huge
garden lizard. Out of pity, they tried to lift it out but were unable to do so.
They reported the matter to their father, who came and lifted it out with his
left hand, as if in play. On being touched by the lotus hand of the Lord, the
lizard threw off its body and assumed the form of a celestial. Though the
Lord is one who knows the hearts of all beings, he inquired of the
personage who he was.
The celestial replied, “I am called Nriga, and I was the son of Ikshvaku. I
was famous in my time for my great generosity. I have given as many cattle
to deserving souls as there are stars in the sky. They were all young milk
cows with calves, gentle in nature and fair in appearance, with horns and
hooves capped in gold and silver, and covered with silks. Not only have I
given gifts of cows but also of gold, elephants, houses, and brides to worthy
recipients. Once, I happened to present a cow that had already been given to
someone else and that had strayed back without my knowledge. Seeing his
cow taken away by another, the ﬁrst man intercepted the second, and they
started arguing. Eventually, they came to me to settle their argument and to
decide to whom the cow belonged. I offered each of them a lakh (one
hundred thousand) of cows if one of them would release his claim, but both
refused and walked away. At the time of my death, I was asked by the
emissaries of Yama, the god of death, whether I would prefer to suffer for
the consequences of my one mistake or enjoy the felicities accruing from
my countless good deeds. I chose the former ﬁrst and found myself falling
down into this well as a lizard. O Lord, devoted as I was to holy men and
charitable deeds, I have retained the memory of my past life, and now
because of the touch of your divine hands, I have been given this form.
Grant me the boon that whatever condition life places me in I shall ever
have devotion to your lotus feet.” So saying, he circumambulated Krishna
and got into the heavenly vehicle that had come to transport him to the
celestial regions.
The Lord took this opportunity to give some advice to his sons, who took
him for granted and who needed to be taught a lesson on the folly of
wasting time in useless pursuits. He pointed out to them that the greatest
wealth is spiritual wealth, and the holy man is the custodian of this wealth
and deserves the highest respect. Higher than a king is the holy man, richer
than a king is he. One should never slight or take revenge on a holy man
even if he curses you, for his curses will eventually prove beneﬁcial. Thus
did the Lord advise his sons, for he knew that a time would come when they
would be guilty of this transgression and thus bring ruin upon themselves as
well as on their race.
It will be noticed that the Lord seldom wasted his time in giving
unwanted advice. Advice that is given unasked will never be appreciated by
the recipient. God waits patiently for us to approach him and ask for his
help, and only then does he step forward and extend a helping hand.
Actually, the hand is always outstretched, grace is always ﬂowing, but if we
do not grasp the hand, it will be of no use to us. He waits patiently until the
soul is evolved enough to realize that it needs divine aid. Then the soul
realizes that the Lord has ever been there, all the time near to it, closer than
the closest, dearer than the dearest.
Thus we ﬁnd in the life of Krishna that there are only two other instances
where he gave advice. One was to his friend Arjuna on the battleﬁeld of
Kurukshetra and the other was to Uddhava at the end of his sojourn on
Earth. Both were times when they were desperate for advice and had
approached him in a mood of self-surrender.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Mukundaya Namaha!
1 9
T he Divine Ruler
Krishnaya Vaasudevaya
Haraye Paramatmane,
Pranatha Klesha Nashaya.
Govindaya namo namaha!
Salutations to thee, O Krishna. Salutations to thee, the Supreme
Being. Salutations to thee, O Govinda, who removes the sorrows of
those who seek relief from their difﬁculties by prostrating to thee.
How the Lord conducted himself as the perfect householder has already
been seen, but he was equally perfect in the discharge of his duties as a
ruler, for Ugrasena was king only in name. It was Krishna who wielded
complete power over the Yadavas and had transformed them from a set of
loosely knit tribes into a mighty power to be reckoned with, even by
J arasandha, the mightiest of the kings of Bharatavarsha.
Each day at the approach of dawn, the cocks would begin to crow, and the
buzzing sound of the bees, stimulated by the fragrant breeze wafting from
the newly opened ﬂowers, was the signal for the birds to waken and begin
their chirping, as if they were the bards detailed to arouse the Lord from his
slumbers. But this auspicious moment preceding dawn was felt to be
repugnant to his wives, who were lying in his embrace, for it proclaimed an
imminent parting. Rising at the time known as brahmamuhurta, the Lord
would perform the ceremonial wash and meditate on the blissful Brahman,
the one without a second, undecaying, self-effulgent, bliss consciousness,
ever established in himself, and transcending the trammels of ignorance.
Then he would take his bath, don new garments, perform Sandhya Vandana,
ﬁnish his Agnihotra sacriﬁce before the sun rose, and then sit silently
repeating the Gayatri mantra. Then he would make offerings to the orb of
the rising sun, Surya Narayana, the symbol of the Supreme, as well as to
other gods, then to the forefathers, and also to the sages, who are aspects of
the Supreme. He would then convey his respects to the elders and holy
Brahmins. He would also make gifts of cows to worthy recipients and touch
with his hands various objects that are considered sacred and auspicious.
Then he would dress and decorate his body, which itself was an ornament
for the whole world. After this, he would bestow on supplicants and
servants whatever they desired. By that time, his charioteer Daruka would
come and bow before him. Krishna would welcome him by holding his
folded palms in his own. A mirror, a cow, a bull, a holy man, some ghee,
and certain divine images would then be shown to him before he got into
the chariot, accompanied by his friends Uddhava and Satyaki. As they
drove off, he would turn around and give a last charming smile to his wives.
Starting in this way from the palaces of all his consorts, Krishna would
appear outside as a single person. Surrounded by all the Yadava chiefs, he
would enter the assembly hall known as Sudharma, wherein those present
did not feel hunger, thirst, or pain. Seated there on the imposing lion throne,
he would discharge the duties of the day. Before starting the serious
business, it was the custom to regale the Lord with the frolic of master
comedians, clowns, and dancing troupes. Then the bards, minstrels, and
heralds would proclaim his valorous doings, learned Brahmins would chant
the Vedas, and orators would describe the mighty feats of the great kings of
the Yadava race. Only then would the assembly take up the main business
of the day.
One day, while the Lord was thus holding his morning audience, a
messenger came from the king of Karushna, called Paundraka. Many people
had led this Paundraka to believe that he was the incarnation of Lord
Vishnu, and the poor man believed it and styled himself as the real
Vaasudeva. He proclaimed that he was the Supreme God, forbade the
worship of all other gods in his country, and put all the rishis and Brahmins
who insisted on reading the Vedas and performing Vedic rituals into the
dungeon. Every week, a man was sent to ask these people if they had come
to their right senses and were ready to accept Paundraka as the only God. If
the answer was in the afﬁrmative, they were let out;  otherwise, they were
left to rot until they agreed. One of these who had been cast into the
dungeon in this manner was Punardatta, the son of Guru Sandipani, whom
Krishna had once brought back from the land of the dead. Paundraka had
grown more and more evil due to his power, and when he heard of the
existence of Krishna, who also styled himself as Vaasudeva, he could not
bear it. So he sent a messenger to the Yadava court with a proclamation:
I’m the true incanation of Vishnu. I’m Narayana, or Vaasudeva, the
primeval being who has incarnated himself to uplift the world from its
misery. I hear that you would have dared to usurp my title and my
insignia, like the Shrivatsa, on the chest, the jewel Kaustubha, and the
appearance of four arms when necessary, carrying the discus
Sudarshana, the conch Panchajanya, the mace Kaumodaki, and the
lotus. Leave off using these emblems and surrender to me immediately,
or else come and ﬁght and let us prove to the world who is the real
incarnation!
This piece of folly was read aloud in the open assembly and was heard
with great amusement. Krishna also smiled and assured the messenger that
his master’s wishes would be complied with and that he would visit him
within a few days and clear his doubts, once and for all.
Paundraka, meanwhile, was preparing himself to meet his maker. He
managed to procure a ruby of extraordinary size, which could pass as the
Kaustubha, had his body painted a deep blue color, and got two extra arms
made of wood, holding the conch and the discus, respectively. This
contraption was ﬁxed on his shoulders. The greatest difﬁculty came in
making the sign of the Shrivatsa on his chest. The sign, as found on Lord
Vishnu and on his incarnations, is in the shape of the foot of the sage,
Bhrigu, and is a peculiar formation of the hair rather than an actual print.
After considerable cogitation, the poor misguided fool got an iron foot
made and branded himself with it. The agony of this procedure may well be
imagined. But when the fester had gone down, it could well pass off as the
Shrivatsa. All these preparations were made with the help of his friend, the
king of Kashi, who was staying at his residence.
Following his message, Lord Krishna, accompanied by an army and his
friends Uddhava and Satyaki, who did not want to miss the fun, proceeded
to Kashi, where Paundraka was awaiting his arrival. The Lord had brought
all his accoutrements with him, his discus Sudarshana, his bow Sarnga, his
mace Kaumodaki, and his sword Nandaka. Seated in his chariot drawn by
his famous four horses, wearing shining yellow garments and a crown
topped with peacock feathers for which he was famous, he shone with a
radiance that put to shame the glory of the sun at noon. As he came to the
outskirts of the holy city of Kashi, the citizens thought to themselves, “If
there is a God on Earth, this must surely be he! How lucky we are to have
even a glimpse of him. Yet, how unlucky, for instead of paying homage to
him, we are forced to worship this fool Paundraka!”
Hearing of Krishna’s arrival, Paundraka arrayed himself in a lovely
yellow robe, and sporting all his absurd accessories, he came out of the city
with two akshauhinis (divisions) of the army. His friend, the king of Kashi,
followed with another army. The Yadavas laughed when they saw
Paundraka impersonating the Lord in every detail.
From the distance of a few yards, Paundarka shouted in a loud voice,
“Halt! Do you now admit that I’m the true Vaasudeva, the only incarnation
of Vishnu?” He feared that a closer inspection would reveal the ﬂaws in his
get-up.
Krishna obediently halted and said, “Yes, indeed, I really admit the truth
to your claims. I call myself Vaasudeva only because I happen to be the son
of Vasudeva. I’m quite ready to be friends with you, provided you set free
the people you have incarcerated in your dungeons.”
Paundraka proudly said, “I have no need of friends like you! Be prepared
to ﬁght, for there is no place on this Earth for both of us!”
So saying, he and his army attacked the Yadava host with various
weapons such as tridents, wooden maces, iron-tipped maces, javelins,
spears, and arrows. At last, tiring of this play, the Lord laughingly told him,
“O Paundraka, whatever weapons you have asked me to give up, I’m now
giving to you. Here, catch them!”
So saying, he threw the discus at Paundraka, who was unable to do
anything but gape as it hurled toward him and nearly severed his head from
his body. His friend, the king of Kashi, soon followed him. Paundraka, who
had been mentally identifying himself with the Lord all the time, was
released from his mortal coil and attained identity of form with the Lord.
This incarnation of the Lord as Krishna is famous for the various ways in
which he gave salvation to people. Mysterious are the ways of karma:  each
one gets liberation in a way that is suited to his own nature.
The Lord is above all laws and has no need to follow the rituals and
regulations, which are meant for mortals to attain liberation, yet we ﬁnd that
he was always the ﬁrst to set an example of right and well-regulated
conduct, according to the ancient rules set down in the Vedas. He taught
that human beings could attain liberation only by following their
svadharma, or the set of rules for which each was best suited, both mentally
and physically. Each one is born in a certain type of environment and has
certain psychological aptitudes, which, if followed, will beneﬁt both oneself
and the society, whereas if one tries to ape the customs and manners of
another mode of life that is at a variance with one’s own nature, both the
individual and the society will suffer. The person will suffer because he or
she will not like the work he or she is doing, and the society will suffer
because the individuals will be giving less than their best. The truth of this
can be seen in the modern society for man (or woman), being a gregarious
animal, is happiest when he has the respect and approval of his fellows.
At this time, there occurred a full and prolonged eclipse of the sun. A
holy immersion in the sacred waters of the lake known as
Syamantapanchaka was considered most auspicious on the day of the
eclipse. This lake was situated in the holy spot of Kurukshetra, where
Parashurama, another incarnation of Lord Vishnu, had created ﬁve lakes
with the blood of the Kshatriyas he had slaughtered. In order to expiate this,
he had performed great penances at this place and an immersion in this lake
was considered most holy.
A large number of people, including the Yadavas, the Kurus, the gopalas,
and the gopis, assembled in this holy spot to submerge themselves in the
sacred waters at the time of the eclipse. The joy of the gopalas and the
gopis when they saw Krishna after so many years knew no bounds. The
Pandavas, with their mother, Kunti, and wife, Draupadi, as well as their
own separate wives, were all there. This was a grand reunion of friends and
relatives, perhaps the last before the great holocaust of the Mahabharata
war. The next time the Pandavas and Kauravas met would be on the
battleﬁeld of Kurukshetra.
All of them spent three delightful months there, and the Lord satisﬁed all,
according to their needs. Krishna embraced Nanda and Yashoda and
consoled them in all ways. Devaki also embraced Yashoda and shed tears
thinking of the great service she had rendered to her.
The gopis, ﬁnding their beloved Lord after so many years, gazed at him
longingly, cursing the fact that they were forced to blink now and again and
thus waste precious seconds. He embraced them all and comforted them
thus: “Clouds in the sky are scattered here and there by the wind. So also
the Creator brings together and separates human beings. We have been
parted physically from each other, but you are ever in my mind. Do not
think your devotion to me will go unrewarded, for it will enable you to cut
the coils of mortal life and attain union with me, who am the inﬁnite source
of bliss.” In the days that followed, he gave them instruction in atma-vidya,
or the science of the self, by reﬂecting on which they attained liberation.
At the end of their stay, their prayer to him was this: “O you who carry
the lotus of the world in your navel, your feet are the object of
contemplation by great yogis with deep understanding and meditative
capacity. But, O Lord, they are the sole support of ordinary folk like us and
the only means of lifting us out of this dilapidated well of human existence.
May those holy feet ever shine in our hearts.”
After having blessed the gopis, the Lord made enquiries of Yudhishtira
and other friends and relatives about their welfare. They, for their part, felt
themselves to be puriﬁed by his presence and told him, “No harm can befall
those who have come into contact with your divine presence even once;
then what about us, who have been blessed by your vision constantly and
have been protected by you at all times?”
One day, Draupadi approached Krishna’s consorts and asked each of them
to narrate the story of her marriage to him. All of them delighted in
describing the romantic way in which he had wed them. Draupadi then
wanted to know whether they regarded him as man or God. All of them
agreed that as a husband he was perfect, as he was in everything he did,
even if it was only playing a game of ball with his youngest child. But their
attitude to him was as if he were the Supreme Lord. They considered
themselves honored to be able to serve him in the most menial capacity, for
in that lay their salvation.
To that holy spot had come all the sages who wished to have a glimpse of
the personage whom they had been cherishing in their hearts during
meditation.
The Lord welcomed them and said, “In this world, people try to acquire
spiritual merit in various ways, undergoing severe austerities, worshipping
images, going on pilgrimages, and so on. These methods take a long time to
purify the mind, but the very sight of holy ones like you destroys the
ignorance of a million lives. He who looks on idols as objects of worship
and fails to see the divinity in a holy man is to be considered as foolish as
the ass that carries grass for the cattle to feed on.”
So saying, the Lord, to set an example of the necessity of venerating the
saints, prostrated to them, for they had given up their all in the quest for the
Supreme.
The sages replied, “Even we, who are noted as being the knowers of truth,
become bewildered when we see the wonderful yet deluding power of your
lila, or play—your assumption of the human garb. Wonderful is this sport of
yours. Today, by meeting you who is the goal of all pious men, we have
attained the fulﬁllment of our lives. Our pursuit of knowledge, our austerity,
and our spiritual practices have borne fruit today, for you are the highest
excellence that one can attain. Salutations to you, O Krishna! You are the
Supreme Being and the Lord of all.”
Vasudeva, Krishna’s father, now had a wish. He approached the sages and
asked them to conduct some yajnas, or sacriﬁces, to efface the effects of his
past karmas. The sages looked at him pityingly and said, “The best way to
efface the effects of past karmas is to adore the Supreme Lord Vishnu, and
that Lord has now been born to you as your son. The fruits of all the yajnas
you have done in your past lives have been embodied in the form of your
son. What need have you to waste your time on other rituals? Worship him,
therefore, and attain to the highest beatitude!”
But Vasudeva, deluded by the Lord’s maya, could see Krishna only as his
son. Knowing his father’s faith in rituals, the Lord told him to do whatever
yajnas he wished to perform. After the performance of the yajnas, all of
them took a ritual bath in the lake, together with the Lord.
Thus they spent many idyllic days with him. All of them were bound to
him with different strands of love, and he made them all happy in his own
inimitable way. At the end of three months, they parted with great sorrow
and returned to their own abodes.
One day at Dwaraka, when the Lord was holding court in the assembly
hall, an unknown person came and prostrated himself. He apprised the Lord
of the state of many of the kings who were rotting in the dungeons of
J arasandha, who had captured and imprisoned all those who had refused to
give the vassal fee to him. Some twenty thousand such defeated rulers had
been incarcerated by him in his fortress at Girivraja. The messenger had
been sent by those kings, begging Krishna to rescue them.
“O Lord,” they said, “the pleasures of royal life are momentary, like a
dream. Life is guided by factors beyond our control and subject to
uncertainty. We are pitiable creatures following the path of desire subject to
the sufferings arising from it. May you, who are the redresser of the sorrows
of all who seek shelter at your feet, be pleased to release us from this
bondage.”
Hardly had this message been read out, when the sage Narada arrived.
Krishna immediately rose up and worshipped him and made him take a seat
beside him. “O all-pervading Lord,” said the sage, “I take shelter at your
feet who, for the beneﬁt of the jivas caught in this transmigratory existence,
have taken on this lilavatar (sportive incarnation) to aid them to escape. To
you, who have thus assumed a human role, I shall communicate what your
aunt’s son and your devotee, Yudhishtira, has set his heart upon. I have
advised him to perform the Rajasuya sacriﬁce, which will enable him to
assume the title of emperor, and he requested me to come to you and get
your approval and blessing.”
Krishna consulted the Yadava chiefs and ascertained that they were in
favor of defeating J arasandha before going to Yudhishtira’s Rajasuya. So he
asked his prime minister, Uddhava, to give his opinion. Uddhava said, “O
Lord, it is incumbent on you to render help to the Pandavas as well as to
release the kings who have appealed to you. Since the ﬁrst ceremony of the
Rajasuya is the Digvijaya, or the conquest of all territories, the subjugation
of J arasandha will be necessary for both purposes. The destruction of
J arasandha will help in the achievement of many other objectives, also, and
relieve the world of its evil ones. Let the Rajasuya be the fruition of the
good karmas of pious people like the Pandavas and the evil karmas of
J arasandha and others. Thus, let us proceed to eliminate J arasandha ﬁrst, so
that Yudhishtira will become qualiﬁed to perform the Rajasuya and also be
able to obtain the support of all the imprisoned kings.”
The advice of Uddhava was acceptable to all, so Krishna set out for
Indraprastha attended by a large retinue. His progress from Dwaraka to
Indraprastha through the subcontinent was hailed by people all along the
route, who ﬂocked in hundreds to have a glimpse of this God on Earth. At
last, he reached the capital of the Pandavas. Yudhishtira and his brothers did
not know in what way they should welcome their dearest cousin, friend, and
God. They embraced him and escorted him around the great assembly hall
known as the Maya Sabha, or Hall of Illusions, built for them by Mayan,
the architect of asuras, whom Arjuna and Krishna had rescued when they
helped Agni to consume the forest of Khandava.
This hall was a wonder of wonders, and Krishna himself had told Mayan
to ﬁll it with deceptive contraptions, for he knew that the end of the era of
Dwapara was approaching, ushering the advent of Kali. The destiny for
which he himself had taken this incarnation had to be fulﬁlled. The hall
attracted many people from far and near. In some places there appeared to
be a lake when there was nothing at all;  a door when there was only a wall,
which was really a door;  a mirror when there was none;  and so on. In fact,
the hall was ﬁlled with optical illusions and had a particular capacity to fool
the evil and the pompous. Mayan had also presented the mighty mace, the
Shaturagdini, to Bhima and the beautiful conch Devadatta to Arjuna. Into
this fantastic sabha, the Pandavas welcomed Krishna and the other Yadavas
who had accompanied him, and he stayed with them for some months,
seeing to all the formalities, which had to be done before the
commencement of the Rajasuya.
The entire universe is nothing but Pure Consciousness,
As it was and as it is.
E ven when there is perception of forms and apprehension of nations
and concepts,
That Consciousness alone ex ists.
YOGA VASISHTA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Bhaktavadalaya Namaha!
2 0
T he Rajasuya Sacriﬁce
Mookam Karoti Vachalam,
Pangum Langayate Girim,
Yad Kripa Tamaham Vande,
Paramananda Madhavam.
I bow to that all blissful Madhava (Krishna), by whose grace the
dumb become orators and the lame cross mountains.
As the sage Narada had told Krishna, he was the one who had ﬁrst put the
idea of holding a Rajasuya sacriﬁce into Yudhishtira’s head. The sage
informed Yudhishtira of the plight of his father, Pandu, in heaven, who was
unable to sit on the same throne with Indra, since his sons had not
performed the Rajasuya sacriﬁce. From the time he heard this, Yudhishtira
started to feel rather guilty, and his life changed from one of peace and
tranquillity to that of restlessness and uncertainty. Personally, he was not in
favor of holding the Rajasuya, since it meant conquering all other kingdoms
and forcing them to accept his suzerainty and pay him tribute. On the other
hand, the thought of his father’s desire to sit beside Indra on the throne, as
well as the enthusiasm of his brothers, who were all for holding the
Rajasuya, caused him great concern. Hence, he had told Narada to invite
Krishna so that he could get his opinion. After having spent some happy
days in the Lord’s company, Yudhishtira, with his usual humility, asked
Krishna whether he really considered him worthy of conducting such a
stupendous sacriﬁce as the Rajasuya. Krishna assured him that he would
certainly be able to conduct it, provided he subdued J arasandha, since he
was the only one capable of challenging the might of the Pandavas. Krishna
proceeded to tell him the story of J arasandha’s birth.
“King Brihadratha of Maghada was childless, so he worshipped the great
sage Chandakaushika, who gave him a mango and told him to give it to his
wife to eat. Since the king had two wives, he shared the mango equally
between them, and in due course each delivered half a baby. The unhappy
king threw the two parts on the waste heap outside the city gates, where
they were picked up by a rakshasi (demoness) called J ara. The halves
accidentally came together in exact position and formed themselves into a
perfect baby boy. J ara handed over the baby to the king, who named him
J arasandha after the woman who had given him life. This man has now
become an evil and haughty king and has captured many kings and offered
them as a sacriﬁce to Lord Shiva. He has attacked the city of Mathura many
times, and I had to shift my people to Dwaraka to protect them. J arasandha
is considered invincible, but he has a weak point, and that is the place where
he was joined as a baby. To attack him with an army would be futile, but he
can be defeated in a duel with one who knows this weak point, and Bhima
is the one who can do it.”
Krishna then outlined their plan of action. Digvijaya was the ﬁrst item of
the Rajasuya. In it, the king sent his emissaries to all other kings and
demanded the vassal fee by which they showed themselves willing to
accord him the position of emperor. Krishna suggested that Arjuna, Bhima,
Nakula, and Sahadeva be sent in all four directions in order to conquer all
the kings. This was done, and most of the kings willingly sent the vassal fee
to Yudhishtira, for he was well loved by all. Hence, he got the name
Ajatashatru (one without enemies).
Now only J arasandha remained. His life demonstrates the great truth that
devotion to God has no merit unless coupled with virtue and righteousness.
He was a great devotee of Shiva and had captured many kings as human
sacriﬁces to Shiva. Krishna pointed out to the Pandavas how devotion
should go hand in hand with kindness to one’s fellow beings. Dharma
should be accompanied with bhakti in order to be fruitful. Krishna said that
he himself would accompany Arjuna and Bhima, and they would go
disguised as Brahmins into the capital city of J arasandha and there
challenge him to a duel. At ﬁrst, Yudhishtira was against the whole idea, but
as usual, he gave in and the trio departed.
Clad in robes of bark and with matted hair, they entered Mahishmathi, the
capital of J arasandha. Had they gone in their own garb, they would have
been made to wait for days outside the fortress before gaining an audience
with the king. As they were sadhus (holy mendicants), J arasandha granted
them permission to enter immediately and received them with great respect.
Refreshments were offered to them, which they refused to take. Somewhat
offended, he demanded to know who they were and what they wanted.
Krishna said, “We are your foes and we desire instant combat with you.
Since you are steeped in adharma (unrighteous behavior), it is our duty to
bring you to your right senses. So you can choose one of us to ﬁght a duel
with you.”
J arasandha was amazed when he heard this, and looking at them closely
he said, “Who are you and why do you pretend to be Brahmins when you
are obviously Kshatriyas? You have refused to partake of any of the
refreshments offered to guests, and you have come with this strange
request. So I demand to know who are you.”
“You are right,” said Krishna, “in guessing that we are not Brahmins but
Kshatriyas. We are your enemies, and hence we have refused your
hospitality. Know me to be Krishna, the son of Vasudeva of the Vrishni
clan. This is Arjuna, the middle one among the Pandavas, and this is Bhima,
his elder brother, destroyer of Hidimba and Bakasura and invincible in
battle. You may now choose with whom you would like to ﬁght.”
J arasandha threw back his head and roared with laughter. “O, you are
Krishna, are you?” he said with a sneer. “I have defeated you eighteen times
in battle and made you run away and take refuge in the city of Dwaraka,
where you live in dread of my wrath! How can I possibly ﬁght with you?
As for Arjuna, he appears to be a mere boy. It is not meet that a hero of my
stature should come to grips with such a stripling. The only one with whom
I can even consider ﬁghting is Bhima, for puny though he is when
compared to me, yet he is better than both of you!”
Krishna laughed and said, “O King! I think you have forgotten what
happened at the Gomantaka hill when you set ﬁre to it and went away after
having boasted of your victory. And perhaps you have also forgotten the
Draupadi swayamvara, when this ‘ stripling,’ as you call him, defeated all
the assembled kings and snatched the prize from beneath your noses.
However, we shall not waste time in talking of the past but get ready to
meet our future!”
Bhima, who was itching for a ﬁght, immediately prepared himself. The
weapon chosen by both was the mace, for they were both expert in it.
Selecting a level ground as the arena, the two warriors closed in combat and
began to exchange blows with their diamond-hard maces. They were well
matched, and J arasandha proved a more formidable adversary than either
Hidimba or Bakasura. As for J arasandha, he had never met such an
opponent. He had fully expected to defeat Bhima in a few hours, and now
the ﬁght was dragging on for days. At twilight when they stopped for the
day, Bhima would retire, worn and weary with his bones broken and his
body crushed, but Krishna would gently massage him and make him whole
again, so that on the morrow he would ﬁght with renewed vigor. On the
sixteenth night, Bhima told Krishna, “O Madhava (Krishna), I ﬁnd it very
difﬁcult to overcome this man.”
Krishna comforted him and infused new spirit into him by imparting his
own spiritual powers to him, and he reminded Bhima of J arasandha’s weak
point, which he had described at Indraprastha. “Once you manage to bring
him down, tear him apart and throw the pieces in different directions,
making sure to reverse the pieces. If the halves are not reversed, they have
the power to come together again. This is the boon given to him by his
foster mother.”
The next day the ﬁght began with great vigor on Bhima’s side after the
Lord’s ministrations, but the mighty king of Magadha was ﬂagging. Bhima
watched carefully for his chance and overthrew him and tore him apart, but
unfortunately, he forgot the instructions for reversing the pieces. He had
hardly turned jubilantly toward Krishna when he saw the look of horror on
Krishna’s face. He turned around to see his victim’s two halves reuniting,
and J arasandha sprang up with a terrible oath, for he realized that his secret
was out. With the strength born of despair, he sprang at Bhima with the
ferocity of a tiger. All rules of fair play were thrown overboard, as these two
mighty giants grappled with each other for their lives. At last, with
superhuman effort, Bhima managed to pin down his foe. He knelt on him
with his knees pressing his chest and his arms forcing him down and cast a
despairing glance at Krishna. The Lord smiled that bewitching smile, which
made Bhima forget his woes and invested new life into him. With a
deliberate gesture, Krishna took up a piece of straw, tore it apart, and,
reversing the sides, threw the pieces in opposite directions. Seeing this,
Bhima suddenly remembered his instructions, and with a quick movement,
he jumped up. Catching hold of the king’s legs, he tore them apart once
more and ﬂung the pieces wide in the prescribed manner. That was the end
of the mighty king of Magadha, and all the citizens rejoiced, for he had
ruled with a hand of iron, brooking no disobedience of any sort and
punishing offenders with the utmost severity.
J arasandha’s son Sahadeva was a devotee of the Lord, and he was placed
on the throne. He promised to follow the ancient code of Sanatana Dharma
and also to help Yudhishtira in the Rajasuya. The imprisoned kings were
now released, and without exception, they promised to support Yudhishtira.
Being redeemed from the horrors of J arasandha’s dungeon and blessed with
the vision of the Lord’s beauteous form, the kings fell at his feet and
extolled him as the Paramatma (supreme spirit). “Allow us to have
unremitting remembrance of your feet even if we have to embroil ourselves
in other births.” This was their plea to him.
Krishna sent them back to their respective countries with all due honors
and returned to Indraprastha with the two brothers. He had killed two birds
with one stone, accomplishing the destruction of J arasandha as well as
procuring the allegiance of so many kings. Yudhishtira’s joy at seeing them
return was great. He prostrated at the feet of the Lord and said, “The
divinities themselves carry out your orders like slaves, yet, O lotus-eyed
one, it is part of your divine lila that you should carry out the instructions of
people like me, who can only pretend to be lords.”
The preparations for the Rajasuya now began in earnest. The Lord
himself supervised the selection of each and every thing, and he would have
nothing but the best for his devotee, Yudhishtira. The best priests in the
country were invited to perform the sacriﬁcial ceremonies. Royalty from all
over Bharatavarsha, together with their subjects, was invited, and they
thronged to Indraprastha.
The priests ploughed the sacriﬁcial ﬁeld with a golden ploughshare, and
there initiated King Yudhishtira in the vows and disciplines of the sacriﬁce,
following the Vedic instructions. Even the utensils were made of gold. Each
of Yudhishtira’s relations was put in charge of a different function. Bhima
was in charge of catering, for he was an expert cook as well as a gourmet.
Sahadeva was in charge of reception, and Nakula in collection of stores.
Arjuna was engaged in serving the elders, while Draupadi attended to the
serving of food. The Kauravas were all there, and Duryodhana, who was
supposed to have something in him of Kubera, the god of wealth, was
placed in charge of the treasury. Karna, who was noted for his love of
charity, supervised the doling out of gifts. All the others were also allotted
different duties. Yudhishtira refused to give any work to Krishna except
overall supervision, but the latter insisted that he should be given something
speciﬁc. At last Yudhishtira, referring to an important ceremony of the
Rajasuya, said, “You are the one who should be honored by us by the
ceremonial washing of your feet! How can I give you any work?”
The Lord deliberately misinterpreted his words and proceeded to wash the
feet of all the guests who arrived, as well as clearing the platters on which
people ate! Such was Yudhishtira’s humility and devotion that the Lord
himself undertook these menial tasks. If his grace is such that it can make
the mute eloquent and the lame cross mountains, what could it not achieve
for Yudhishtira, who had surrendered his all at Krishna’s feet? The Rajasuya
was a magniﬁcent success. There was no place where Krishna’s eyes did
not reach. At one time, he would be found in the music hall, entertaining
guests with his ﬂute;  at others in the kitchen, tasting a new dish to ﬁnd out
how it was;  at other times in the dining hall, serving the guests and even
removing the leaves on which they ate;  at others, escorting guests to the
chambers specially prepared for them.
Indraprastha was ﬁlled with all sorts of amusements;  parks, dancing halls,
and all types of entertainments were laid out for the guests who did not like
to remain in the sacriﬁcial hall all the time watching the religious
ceremonies. All the foremost kings, sages, and Brahmins of Bharathavarsha
had come. The very gods themselves were supposed to have come and
personally accepted the offerings made to them. Everyone went away
utterly satisﬁed and full of praise for Yudhishtira. Money, jewels, horses,
elephants, and cattle poured into the land from all the kings who had agreed
to be his vassals. Rukmini, the incarnation of Lakshmi Devi, the goddess of
wealth, had come with Krishna, and he had told her to make sure that there
should be no dearth of anything in the Rajasuya, so naturally money ﬂowed
like water into Yudhishtira’s coffers.
The only person who had come reluctantly was Shishupala, Prince of
Chedi, who had been nursing a grudge against Krishna all these years since
the abduction of Rukmini. His parents, who were devotees of the Lord, had
also come. In fact, his mother was Krishna’s aunt, but Shishupala refused to
come unless he was given a self-contained apartment where he would have
no necessity to meet Krishna. So, while the rest of the company enjoyed
themselves with merrymaking from morn till midnight, regaling themselves
with all the wonderful entertainments that had been provided, Shishupala
alone incarcerated himself in his own private hidey-hole, not even daring to
take a stroll in the beautiful gardens in case he met his hated rival. He
listened with envy to the sweet strains of music, laughter, and shouts that
drifted down as if from another world. His hatred of Krishna had become an
obsession, so that like Kamsa, he could only think of Krishna night and day.
At last, he could bear it no longer. “I’ll venture forth,” said he to himself.
“Why should I fear anyone? I haven’t done anything wrong. Let him face
me if he dares! I’m sure he’s trying to avoid me.”
Bolstering up his courage with such ridiculous remarks, he strode forth,
affecting a nonchalance he did not feel. As luck would have it, the ﬁrst
person he saw as he stepped out was the object of his hatred, striding
toward him with a purposeful air. Shishupala pretended not to notice him
and walked on with a disdainful smile, hoping that Krishna would have the
decency to make way for him. But Krishna did nothing of the sort and a
collision seemed unavoidable, so Shishupala was forced to stop.
Immediately, Krishna said, “Ah, Cousin! You’re just the man I wanted to
see. Why is it that we haven’t seen you around? I was just coming to inquire
if you were all right.”
Shishupala gave him a haughty look, and not deigning to reply, he moved
on. Krishna looked at him with a smile. Foolish though he was, he had a
soft spot for him.
Another person who was completely disgruntled at the way the Rajasuya
was proceeding was Duryodhana. Seeing the Pandavas’ afﬂuence and the
prestige and honor being heaped on his cousin Yudhishtira, he felt quite sick
with envy. Between the two of them, he and Karna concocted a plan to ruin
Yudhishtira and make the Rajasuya come to an ignominious end for lack of
funds. Since he had been kept in charge of the treasury and Karna in charge
of gifts, they decided to give so lavishly that the treasury would soon be
empty. Gleefully, the envious pair set to work, giving ﬁfty where only one
was needed, but they failed to take into consideration that Yudhishtira had
entrusted everything to the hands of the Lord, whose eyes were everywhere.
From the beginning, he was wise to the tricks of the unscrupulous pair and
had warned Rukmini. She blessed Yudhishtira so that every time they
emptied the coffers, wealth came pouring in from the vassal kingdoms. So
the consequence of Duryodhana’s evil designs was just the opposite of what
he had hoped for. The impecunious Brahmins who had come, expecting
only a reasonable sum to be given as gifts, found themselves being pressed
into accepting vast amounts of money and other goods. Bewildered, yet
delighted, at this unexpected good luck, they praised and blessed
Yudhishtira in front of the furious Duryodhana.
On the day when the libations with soma juice were made, Yudhishtira
personally proceeded to honor the sacriﬁcial priests. Vyasa made the
announcement that thereafter Draupadi would be the emperor’s wife alone
and that they would have no physical relationships in future. The other four
brothers would have to revere them as parents. They bowed in assent. The
coronation of the emperor and empress was now performed on a grand
scale. At the end of the ceremony came the Arghya Puja, or worship of the
noblest person present.
Yudhishtira had already decided in his own mind that Krishna alone was
ﬁt for that signal honor, but since there might be a difference of opinion
among the rest, he asked his youngest brother, Sahadeva, who was noted for
his wisdom, to speak up. Without hesitation, Sahadeva said, “The
worshipful Lord Krishna, the protector of all devotees, alone is worthy of
this honor. This entire cosmos is his manifestation. The whole universe is
his form. By his grace alone, the goals of dharma, artha, kama, and moksha
can be achieved. What is the doubt, therefore, that he alone should be
worshipped as the foremost among the honored guests? By so doing, we
shall be worshipping all beings, including ourselves. A tree may be very
large, O King, with many branches, spreading in many directions, some
ﬁlled with ﬂowers, some with fruits, and some with leaves. In fact, the
branches and leaves may be so numerous that our attention may be caught
by them alone. But when the time comes to water the tree, does anyone
doubt where the water should be poured? Therefore, if you wish the fruits
of your sacriﬁce to be without end, offer the Arghya Puja to Krishna, the
soul of all, the perfect, the supremely peaceful one, in whose eyes nothing is
different from himself.”
Yudhishtira was very pleased by this speech of his wise young brother.
The Lord is the root from which the variegated tree of the world has
sprouted and spread. What doubt, then, that his feet should be washed in the
ﬁnal puja (worship ceremony)?
Bhishma, the grandsire of the Kurus, now added, “In this great and
glorious assembly, Krishna shines as the one sun in the midst of his
multitudinous rays. Without him, the hall will lose its luster. He alone
deserves the signal honor.”
The sage Vyasa promptly endorsed this and declared Krishna to be God
incarnate. So everything was prepared for the Arghya Puja. The Lord was
seated on a jeweled throne, and Yudhishtira, accompanied by his brothers
and Draupadi, came forward with gem-studded golden pots containing
perfumed water. Placing the lotus feet of the Lord tenderly on a golden
plate, Yudhishtira washed them lovingly with tears of joy and love
overﬂowing from his eyes. His brothers and Draupadi followed suit. The
water that was thus consecrated was sprinkled reverently on their own
heads and then over the entire assembly. Making rich offerings of silks and
ornaments to all, Yudhishtira stood with tears welling up in his eyes,
overcome with emotion and unable to speak, so great was the bliss that
threatened to overwhelm him. Everybody saluted the Lord, sitting
resplendent on the throne and looking so radiant that they felt themselves
bathed in the golden glow emanating from him. Shouts of “Jai Krishna!
(Victory to Krishna!) Jai Vaasudeva! Jai Govinda! Jai Madhava!” rent the
air as they showered ﬂowers on him.
At this auspicious time, Shishupala, prompted by death himself, jumped
up and said scornfully, “A bastard (Yudhishtira) has asked the son of a river
(Bhishma) for advice. And the person chosen for Arghya Puja is a poor
cowherd who has eaten earth, stolen butter and gopis’ clothes, dallied with
them, killed his own uncle Kamsa, and schemed to have the powerful
J arasandha killed by a trick. In this noble gathering of illustrious kings and
holy rishis, could you not ﬁnd anyone superior to this base-born Yadava?
He is not the equal in birth or position of any one of us here and should
never have been invited in the ﬁrst place. To choose him in preference to all
others is an insult to this august assembly. O Yudhishtira! Do not think that
we have submitted to you through fear or dread of your powers;  we came
because we honor your nobility and wisdom. Now that you have shown
yourself to be devoid of both, it is better not to stay to be further insulted.
Come, O kings! Let us kill this upstart Yadava immediately and defeat the
Pandavas, who have subjected us to these intolerable insults!”
So spoke Shishupala, after having bottled up his hatred for so many years.
Immediately, the assembly broke up into factions, some siding with
Yudhishtira and others, Shishupala. The Rajasuya seemed in danger of
degenerating into a vulgar brawl. Krishna alone took no notice of
Shishupala’s speech, as a lion does not notice a jackal’s howls. Bhima,
Arjuna, and Sahadeva, however, could not tolerate these insults and would
have ﬂung themselves on Shishupala and made an end of him then and
there, but Yudhishtira held them back and tried his best to pacify
Shishupala. Many in the assembly, unable to bear these insults to the Lord,
closed their ears and walked out, for one incurs sin by listening to the
viliﬁcation of a holy personage.
Long ago, the Lord had made a promise to his aunt, Shishupala’s mother,
that he would calmly bear a hundred insults from her son, so he listened
with a smile while Shishupala kept ranting. At last, Shishupala, having
exhausted all the slurs he could hurl at both Krishna and Bhishma and
enraged at having met with no retaliation, sprang at Krishna like an angry
cobra with hood upraised to strike and challenged him to a duel. Arjuna and
the others immediately surrounded the Lord in order to protect him. Krishna
got up in a leisurely manner from the jeweled throne and moved his friends
gently aside. He strode forward to meet the angry Shishupala, who had
more than exhausted the quota of a hundred insults allotted to him. As
Shishupala charged toward him brandishing his sword, the Lord hurled his
discus, the Sudarshana, at him with a look of inﬁnite compassion on his
face. In that split second before death overtook him, Shishupala
remembered his previous lives and folded his palms above his head and
paid homage to his master. The discus severed Shishupala’s head from his
body, and a glow of light emerged from him and melted into the aura
surrounding the Lord. Shishupala, like Kamsa, had lived for so long
thinking only of him that he had achieved identity with him.
This miracle following Shishupala’s end made Yudhishtira wonder who
he had been, so he asked Narada to explain how a man who from childhood
had spent his time disparaging Krishna could achieve union with him.
The divine sage then explained how once the guards of Lord Vishnu’s
abode at Vaikunta, known as J aya and Vijaya, had barred the entry of the
boy sages, known as the Sanat Kumaras, into the presence of the Lord, and
the sages had cursed them, stipulating that they must be born on Earth.
They had appealed to Lord Vishnu, who had given them a choice. They
could either take seven ordinary births on Earth as his devotees or three
extraordinary births as his enemies! Either way, they would have constant
memory of him and attain him at the end of the stipulated period of time.
They opted for the path of enmity, for it would enable them to return to
Vaikunta faster, but they pleaded that at each of these three births as his
enemies, they should meet their end at the hands of their master alone. To
this he had agreed. In their ﬁrst birth, they had been born as the fearful
demons, Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashipu, who were killed by the Lord in
his incarnations as Varaha (the boar) and Narasimha (the man-lion),
respectively. In their second births, as Ravana and Kumbhakarna, they were
killed by the Lord in his incarnation as Sri Rama. This was their ﬁnal birth,
in which they were born as Shishupala and Dantavakra. The sage Narada
now concluded his tale. “Shishupala has now been given salvation, and
Dantavakra will soon follow suit.”
At the end of the Rajasuya, the emperor, together with his consort, was
seated in a chariot decorated with golden chains drawn by excellent horses
and taken around the city. After this, the priests made him take the
ceremonial bath, together with Draupadi, in the holy river. This was known
as the avabrithasnana. Drums blared and the people danced and showered
ﬂowers all down the path leading to the palace. Everyone who attended the
Rajasuya took a ceremonial bath in the river, since it was considered to be
most auspicious. This was the concluding ceremony, and the guests
departed after having been honored by the emperor. The Pandavas
persuaded Lord Krishna and the Kauravas to stay a while longer and enjoy
their hospitality, as well as the sights of the city of wonders. Though the
invitation was made in all good faith, yet it was to lay the foundation for the
war between the cousins, as will be seen.
Seeing the splendor of the Pandavas’ palace and the glory that the
Rajasuya had brought them, Duryodhana felt sick with envy. He longed to
possess all this for himself but did not know how he could accomplish it.
One day, Yudhishtira was sitting on a golden throne in the Maya Sabha, or
Hall of Illusions, looking like Indra, the king of the gods, with Draupadi on
one side and Krishna on the other and surrounded by his brothers. J ust then,
Duryodhana, wearing a diamond-studded diadem and many necklaces,
approached the hall, followed by his brother. Holding a sword in his hand
he came in, showering abuses at the guards to show off his importance. As
has been said before, the Maya Sabha was ﬁlled with optical illusions.
Duryodhana thought it demeaning to ask questions and air his ignorance.
He had already been brought to grief once before when he had bumped his
head against the wall as he had tried to pass through what he had thought to
be a door. But that had not been so bad, for there had been no one with him,
and as he gave a quick glance around, he had not seen anyone, though he
did hear a suspicion of girlish laughter, which sounded vaguely familiar.
But on that particular day, surrounded by his brothers and in full view of
the assembly, he came to what he thought was a lotus lake in the middle of
the hall and carefully skirted it, only to be met with the mocking laughter of
Panchali and Bhima and the titters of the others. Infuriated by this, he strode
forward until he came to another pool, which he imagined to be another
illusion. With a careless smile and a knowing look, meant to convince the
onlookers of his superior knowledge of such things, he plunged in, only to
ﬁnd himself sprawling in an undigniﬁed heap in the water, his diadem awry,
his clothes drenched, and his necklaces knotted up. Draupadi, unable to
control her mirth this time, was in stitches. Bhima’s guffaws ﬁlled the hall,
and almost all the other spectators were convulsed at the sight of the
pompous Duryodhana in such a ludicrous predicament. Yudhishtira alone,
who could never bear the sight of another person’s distress, ran to comfort
him and offered him rich and costly garments to replace the ones that had
been ruined, but Duryodhana was not appeased by this and swore
vengeance on Draupadi as well as the Pandavas. “In just such an open court
as this,” he swore to himself, “will I make her the laughingstock of the
multitude!”
The Lord, in whose presence all this took place, remained silent. In fact, it
is even suspected that it was his mischievous and encouraging look that
emboldened Draupadi and Bhima to give way to their mirth! His ways are
inscrutable, and who knows, but this might have been engineered by him to
bring about the cause for the war.
After this debacle, Duryodhana refused to stay any longer and departed
for Hastinapura in a hurry. He was determined to avenge these insults and
held an emergency council meeting as soon as they reached Hastinapura.
Shakuni taunted Duryodhana. “Did you see the prosperity of the Pandavas?
I’m sure we were invited only so that they could ﬂaunt their wealth before
us. Unless we do something soon, we will be destroyed.”
Duryodhana was still brooding over his ridiculous fall. “Did you see how
Bhima and the princess of Panchala laughed at my discomﬁture? When I
think of it, my blood boils. I will never rest in peace until the whole world
laughs at Panchali!”
Thus the Kauravas sat and plotted and thought of a hundred different
schemes to get even with the Pandavas.
Lord Krishna and Balarama also left Indraprastha soon after, for they
heard that Dwaraka was being besieged by King Salva of Saubha. He had
been Shishupala’s friend and during the time of the Rukmini swayamvara
had been witness to his embarrassment. He had taken a vow before all the
other kings that he would rid this world of the entire race of Yadavas. In
order to accomplish this, he had done severe tapasya to Lord Shiva, who
had given him an aerial vehicle called the Saubha, which was as big as a
palace and which could be made invisible. (The description of this aerial
chariot actually resembles that of some extraterrestial vehicle.) Salva had
bided his time, and when he heard of Shishupala’s death, he felt that it was
the opportune time for him to attack Dwaraka, especially since he knew that
both Krishna and Balarama were away and only Pradyumna had been left to
hold the fort.
He attacked Dwaraka from the Saubha and destroyed the outer woodlands
and gardens. Then he directed the attack against the various bastions of the
city so that his army, which was marching over land, could easily penetrate
it. Flashes of lightning, hailstones, cyclonic storms, and clouds of dust were
released from the Saubha, which was equipped with all types of
unimaginable weapons. Pradyumna and other sons of Krishna ably
defended the city for twenty-seven days. At last, Pradyumna was injured by
a blow on the chest by Dyumna, Salva’s minister, and he swooned. His
charioteer took him away from the battleﬁeld immediately. Pradyumna was
very angry with his driver when he came to his senses, and he insisted on
returning to the fray immediately.
Luckily, at this opportune moment, the Lord arrived on the scene and
charged into combat with Salva. When the latter found himself outmatched,
he resorted to illusory tricks and made Vasudeva’s form appear before the
Lord and then cut off his head. For a moment it seemed as if Krishna
himself trembled to see the fate of his dear father, but in a split second, he
realized that it was but an illusion, and he rushed forward and killed Salva
and destroyed the Saubha. Dantavakra, a close friend of Salva and
Shishupala, now came forward, and Krishna made an end of him with his
mace, the Kaumodaki, and just as in the case of Shishupala, a strange light
was seen to pass from him and melt into the Lord’s aura, for he had also
been one of the twin guards of Lord Vishnu, as explained by Narada.
The killing of Dantavakra marks the end of the second phase of the Lord’s
life—His Raja Lila or Dwaraka Lila. The next phase is almost entirely
connected with the fortunes or misfortunes of the Pandava brothers.
Whether we live in a cave or in a palace, in the forest or on a
mountaintop, in water or in ﬁre, there is no difference. He who has
entrusted himself into your keeping, O Lord, will ever be protected
by you. As the akola seed returns to the tree at night, as the iron
ﬁlings rush to the magnet, as the faithful wife never deserts her
husband in good and bad times, as the creeper clings to the tree and
the river rushes to the ocean, so let my mind run to thee, O Lord,
and stay there forever.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Vasudeva carries baby Krishna to Dwaraka.
The Butter Thief
Krishna as Damodara
Kaliya Mardanam
Krishna steals gopis’ clothes.
Govardhana Giridhari
Radha-Krishna
Parthasarthy (Arjuna’s Charioteer)
Aum Purushottamaya Namaha!
PART TH RE E
Uttama-Lila—The Game Supreme
 
Aum Yogeeshwaraya Namaha!
The Game Supreme
I s this Thy lila O Lord,
Thy game supreme,
To lift up the lowly
And make all holy?
This frail reed Thou hast fashioned such,
U plifting, ennobling by Thy very touch.
That which was despised by all,
Was enlivened, ex alted by Thy call.
Considered hollow, worthless, scorned,
By Thy grace has become adorned.
Drinking the nectar of Thy rosebud lips,
I t has poured out this unending song of bliss,
The description of Thy divine glories,
Couched in the form of enthralling stories,
As narrated by Thee to me, O Vanamali!
This lila is offered by Thy Servant, Devi.
Aum Hrishikeshaya Namaha!
2 1
T he Gambling Match
Ha Krishna Dwaraka Vasin,
Kwasi Yadava Nandana,
I man Avastham Sampraptham,
Anatham kim U pekhsyasi!
O Krishna, thou dweller of the city of Dwaraka,
Where art thou, O darling of the Yadavas?
Why hast thou forsaken me, alone and orphaned in this terrible
plight?
While the Lord was thus engaged with Salva, momentous happenings were
taking place at Hastinapura. At the emergency council meeting held by
Duryodhana after his ignominious departure from the Maya Sabha, his
friend Karna, to comfort him, proposed with his usual impetuosity that they
should immediately march to Indraprastha and wipe out the Pandavas!
Shakuni said scornfully, “We will never be able to beat the Pandavas in an
open battle, especially now, when they have the entire Bharatavarsha on
their side. Though Karna is always boasting of his prowess, he has already
been defeated once by Arjuna. So let’s not talk of battle. I have a plan that
will deprive the Pandavas of all their possessions without shedding a drop
of blood. Yudhishtira has a weakness for gambling, and I’m an adept at
dice. If we can persuade him to accept a match on some pretext or other, I
can assure you that I’ll deprive him of everything.”
Duryodhana was delighted by this simple solution to his problem and
pestered his aged parent to send an invitation to the Pandavas. Since a
pretext had to be found to invite them, a magniﬁcent assembly hall similar
to the Maya Sabha, but far inferior to it, was constructed. It was called the
J ayanta Sabha, the Victory Hall. The invitation had to be sent through a
person revered by the Pandavas or else they might not accept it, so
Duryodhana persuaded his doting father to write the invitation and
instructed his uncle Vidura to take the message. The latter protested in the
most vehement terms when he was given the order.
“Why are you stooping to such an atrocity?” he asked his nephew “This
will surely lead to your downfall. If you really covet the wealth of the
Pandavas, you have only to ask them openly. I assure you that Yudhishtira
will be happy to hand over everything to you and retire to the forest, and his
brothers will never disobey him.”
Duryodhana was furious when he heard this and called his uncle an
ungrateful wretch. “You eat our food and enjoy our shelter, but your heart is
always with the Pandavas. Do what you are told!” he shouted.
Dhritarashtra also insisted that Vidura should go. It is strange that
Bhishma, who was the soul of dharma, did not intervene. At last, Vidura
agreed, for he thought that he had a chance of persuading Yudhishtira not to
accept the invitation.
At Indraprastha, he was welcomed with the greatest of affection by the
Pandavas and Panchali. He handed over the message and urged Yudhishtira
not to accept it, since he was sure it was a trick concocted by Duryodhana
and Shakuni. Yudhishtira then asked his brothers for their opinion. All of
them except Bhima advised him to decline, but somehow he decided to
accept.
“How can I refuse an invitation sent by my uncle who stands in the place
of my father?” he asked.
Once again, Vidura urged him to decline, but Yudhishtira remained ﬁrm
in his decision.
“After all, it’s only a friendly match,” he said, “and I’m as good a player
as my cousin. Moreover, if I do not accept, it will be an insult to you, for
you have been sent to fetch me. It will also be an affront to my uncle, who
has issued the invitation. Even if it leads to my downfall, let it not be said
that Yudhishtira swerved from the dictates of honorable behavior.” This was
an occasion when Yudhishtira’s adherence to dharma led to his ruin.
Vidura could do nothing more than counsel him to be on his guard at all
times. The Kauravas could hardly believe the good news. For once,
Duryodhana was delighted with Vidura, and he lifted him up onto the
throne and said, “Uncle, I’m eternally grateful to you. Now I shall have a
chance to make the world laugh at Draupadi, and I shall also teach Bhima a
lesson.”
The Pandavas, accompanied by Draupadi, set forth to Hastinapura in ﬁve
magniﬁcent chariots. Reaching the city, they went to pay their respects to all
the elders. Later, they were escorted to their assigned quarters, and
Draupadi went to Gandhari’s apartment. The next day, they were taken to
admire the J ayanta Sabha. They were quite sincere in their admiration,
especially Yudhishtira, who was determined to maintain cordial
relationships at all costs. After this, Shakuni took over.
He said, “You have proved your superiority in all things, O Yudhishtira!
Now let us test your skill in dice playing. We can thus pass the hours
pleasantly.”
Though he had a weakness for the game, Yudhishtira did not yield easily.
He replied ﬁrmly, “It is well known that gambling is a terrible sin. Tell me
frankly what you want from me, and I shall gladly give it.” Then, going to
Bhishma, he whispered, “Are you and the elders approving of this gambling
match?”
Bhishma whispered back, “What is to happen will happen.” Vidura alone
made a ﬁnal desperate attempt to halt the impending catastrophe, but
Duryodhana insolently ordered him to shut his mouth.
At this, Karna jeered and asked Yudhishtira, “Why are you so frightened
of trying your fortune at a throw of dice? If this be so, how terriﬁed you
must be of trying your fortunes on the battleﬁeld!”
This infuriated Arjuna, and he strung his bow. This appeared to help
Yudhishtira make up his mind, and he told Shakuni he would play. Then
Shakuni announced he was going to throw the dice on Duryodhana’s behalf,
and Yudhishtira protested. Shakuni silenced him by sneeringly asking
whether he was looking for another excuse for backing out. Yudhishtira
gave in with a sigh to what was inexorably the hand of fate beckoning him
to his doom. The two of them sat down facing each other. Yudhishtira chose
the white dice and Shakuni the blue.
Duryodhana said, “I shall wager on behalf of my uncle anything of equal
value, if not more, to what Yudhishtira wagers.”
Yudhishtira was in the habit of invoking the blessings of the Lord before
starting any undertaking, but on this momentous occasion, it seemed to
have slipped his mind.
As soon as they arrived, Duryodhana had greedily eyed the jeweled and
magniﬁcent chariot in which Yudhishtira had come, so that was the ﬁrst
thing to be staked and lost. Following this, one by one Yudhishtira lost
almost all his worldly possessions, for Shakuni was both a master player
and a master cheat. The whole court watched with bated breath. The only
sound was the clicking of the dice as the two protagonists rattled them in
the little box before throwing them on the table. After every throw, the
Kauravas would shout in triumph. Yudhishtira lost everything—his
jewelery, elephants, horses, chariots, army, palaces, and ﬁnally his entire
kingdom. Shakuni’s repeated shouts of victory and Duryodhana’s
triumphant exclamations started to become monotonous. No one in the
assembly dared to intervene, perhaps for fear of Duryodhana’s
uncontrollable wrath. Strangely enough, it never occurred to Yudhishtira to
mentally ask Lord Krishna for help. For once, the noble Yudhishtira seemed
to have taken leave of his senses. He was now left with nothing, but
Shakuni had not ﬁnished with him.
“I have nothing more to stake,” Yudhishtira whispered.
But Shakuni taunted, “You have your brothers, and at least one of them
may prove to have the luck that you seem to lack!”
“I stake my brother Nakula,” he said and ﬂung the dice. “He is mine,”
shouted Shakuni, exultantly.
One by one he wagered all his beloved brothers and lost them all. After
this, he no longer cared what happened and hardly needed any
encouragement from Shakuni to stake himself. With head bowed in shame,
Yudhishtira sat as if carved of stone while uncle and nephew exchanged a
meaningful look. Shakuni was in full command of the situation. “You still
have your empress—Draupadi,” he tempted. “If you stake her, perhaps she
will be able to turn your tide of fortune. I am giving this advice out of
sympathy for you.”
At this, both Vidura and Bhishma raised their voices in protest, and
Arjuna took up his bow and Bhima his mace. Fearing that Yudhishtira
might decline, Duryodhana quickly said, “If Draupadi is staked and
Yudhishtira wins, I’m prepared to return all that he has lost so far!”
His mind dulled by pain, his senses clouded with sorrow, Yudhishtira
grasped at this last straw, hoping for a miracle to retrieve his failing
fortunes. He staked his beloved queen, as if she were some common
baggage to be bought and sold in the marketplace. With bated breath, all
watched the last fatal throw of dice. The result was preordained;
Duryodhana’s triumph was complete. The whole assembly was in an uproar.
Duryodhana’s voice roared above the rest. “The Pandavas are now our
slaves. Let this be quickly announced, here and in Indraprastha. Everything
there now belongs to me. Let the Pandavas be taken to the kitchen to get
acquainted with their new duties. Vidura! Go and fetch the empress of
Indraprastha from the women’s quarters!”
Vidura said in a fury, “Don’t you see that you are heading for destruction?
It is not too late to stop this farce. If you don’t listen to me, you and your
brothers will be doomed.”
Duryodhana retorted, “Yudhishtira gambled everything away of his own
free will. If we have resorted to adharma, as you say, how is it that fortune
has favored us and not the Pandavas?”
Bhishma protested mildly, and Dhritarashtra said nothing. Since Vidura
refused to go and fetch Draupadi, Duryodhana sent an agent. Unlike other
women in her predicament who would have lamented, Draupadi proudly
refused to go at Duryodhana’s behest.
“Go back and ﬁnd out whether my husband lost himself ﬁrst and then
gambled me, or vice versa,” she ordered. If he had lost her after having lost
himself, it would not be considered valid, since he was already a slave and a
slave had no right to stake anything. Duryodhana was furious when the
messenger returned with this news. He ordered his brother Dussasana to
bring her forcibly, if necessary, to the open court and ask her questions in
public.
Draupadi was having her monthly period, and she was seated in a separate
apartment, clad in a single piece of cloth, as was the custom. Heedless of
her pitiful state, the wicked Dussasana charged at her with a cruel laugh.
Like a doe chased by a tiger, Draupadi ﬂed to Dussasana’s mother
Gandhari, and taking refuge behind her, she pleaded to be protected against
her son. To Gandhari’s eternal shame, she failed to give her the refuge that
any woman deserved, let alone her own stepdaughter. She virtually pushed
Draupadi into Dussasana’s arms with these words, “Throw off this pretence
of modesty! After all, they are your brothers-in-law who are summoning
you. So go!”
Now that he was openly supported by his mother, Dussasana lost no time
in grabbing Draupadi by her long tresses. When she resisted, he dragged her
forcibly through the streets of Hastinapura to the assembly hall of the
Kurus. All the citizens exclaimed in sympathy, but none dared to lift a
ﬁnger to help. Draupadi, however, was a woman of great courage and
determination. She did not weep or plead as any other woman might have
done in her postion. With head held high she turned to look questioningly at
her husbands, Bhima and Arjuna. She did not expect them to fail her at this
critical juncture. To her dismay, they hung their heads down and would not
look at her. She realized that they were equally helpless. Daunted not at all,
she turned to the elders and inquired conﬁdently, “Did the emperor lose
himself ﬁrst and then stake me? If so, the whole wager is null and void
since he was no longer a free man and had no right to gamble with anyone.
If, on the other hand, he staked me ﬁrst, still it would be against the rules,
for he does not have absolute right over me. I belong to all ﬁve of them!”
In a voice throbbing with fury and sorrow, Draupadi continued, “In this
ancient house of Kurus, reputed from time immemorial for the dispensing
of dharma, adharma has reared its ugly head. Here is this man, drunk with
power, asking his brother to drag a woman into the court. Here is my
husband, the image of dharma, sitting quietly. And here are all the elders
looking on with stony eyes.” In a ringing voice, she continued, “In the
presence of all of you, I asked a simple question to which I was not given a
reply. Did my husband stake me before or after he lost himself? Am I their
slave? Answer me.” She was seething with anger and looked daggers at her
husbands. Yudhishtira would have been happy if the earth had swallowed
him up then and there. The loss of his kingdom did not pain him as much as
the burning glance of his beloved queen.
Draupadi turned to Bhishma, “Grandfather, can’t you give me an
answer?”
Bhishma, for the ﬁrst time in his life, gave an equivocal answer, “I am
indeed at a loss to give a proper answer to your question. A man cannot
gamble something after he has lost himself, it is true, but a man has a right
over his wife whether he is free or not. Accordingly, I cannot say whether
you are free.” Draupadi looked around like a stricken deer. Duryodhana and
Karna were exultant and insulted her further by calling her a common
woman, owned by ﬁve men.
At last Vikarna, the youngest of the Kaurava brothers, rose and boldly
spoke up for Draupadi. Karna told him to shut up and insultingly told
Draupadi that she was now free to choose another husband from among the
Kauravas. Duryodhana gloatingly ordered Dussasana to remove the royal
garments from the Pandavas, for they were now slaves and not qualiﬁed to
wear such splendid clothes. Vidura could bear it no longer, and he cursed
Duryodhana from the depths of his heart. “All of you will die one day at the
hands of your righteous cousins,” he declared.
Duryodhana scoffed at his uncle’s curse and ordered Dussasana to
proceed. Determined to adhere to dharma at all costs, the Pandavas threw
down their upper garments.
Then Duryodhana commanded, “Now, undress their woman! Take off her
clothes and show her to the court for the shameless creature that she is. Let
her see how helpless her husbands are to aid her.”
Dussasana, nothing loath, jumped forward and started tugging at
Draupadi’s one piece of cloth, stained with blood, which she was clutching
to herself in desperation. Poor Draupadi! She knew that she was beyond all
human aid. Neither the strength of her husbands nor her own wits had been
able to save her. She had ﬁve husbands, all of them great warriors and kings
among men. She herself was an empress in her own right;  yet now, when
she was in distress, there was none to lift a little ﬁnger to save her.
She had been holding her arms across her breasts to preserve the remnants
of her pride, but realizing her utter helplessness, she lifted up both her
hands in supplication to Krishna, while Dussasana laid his hands on her
garment and tugged it. In utter despair, she cried aloud, “O Krishna, thou
darling of the Yadavas, dwelling at Dwaraka! Where are you? Why have
you forsaken me in this terrible predicament? I am helpless and alone and
faced with disaster!” With this piteous cry, she stood with her hand uplifted
in supplication and surrendered her body, mind, and spirit mentally to the
Lord. The Lord was ﬁghting Salva at that time. For some moments, he
appeared to have lost interest in the battle and rushed to her aid, and that
was the time when Salva was able to strike him.
To the wonder of all who were assembled there, though Dussasana pulled
and tugged, yard after yard of material came out, but Panchali remained
clothed. No amount of unwinding and tugging could denude her completely.
Stunned moments passed while Dussasana kept pulling and pulling, and
Draupadi kept chanting and chanting the names of the Lord. The entire ﬂoor
was covered with heaps of cloth, but Draupadi was still clad as before.
Thus Draupadi’s agony changed to ecstasy. Even after the exhausted
Dussasana had collapsed on the ﬂoor, utterly worn out by his labors,
Draupadi kept chanting and singing the Lord’s praises in ecstatic adoration.
This is one of the most sacred incidents in the Mahabharata and is an
example to all women that they are never as helpless as they think so long
as they have devotion to the Lord.
In fact, the entire life of the Pandavas is a great example to devotees.
They were most dear to Krishna, yet we ﬁnd their lives to be ﬁlled with
hardships. At one moment they were taken to the pinnacle of glory at the
Rajasuya, when the whole of Bharatavarsha rose up to acclaim them
emperors, and the next moment they were branded slaves. Humiliated and
insulted by the very man they despised, they were buffeted hither and
thither by waves of misfortune and forced to endure the agony of seeing
their beloved wife insulted and the humiliation of being powerless to help
her! What is the lesson to be learned? God’s ways are mysterious. He is not
interested in our material prospects or our physical problems. The sole aim
of the divine is to fulﬁll the cosmic purpose of achieving unity with him,
and for that, all means are used. The selﬁsh individual ego has to be
transformed in the alternating ﬁres of fortune and misfortune, honor and
dishonor. All these dualities, which have such meaning and purpose in the
1ife of the ordinary individual, have to be surmounted in the life of the
Godman, to which state Krishna was leading his devotees, the Pandavas,
and that is why they had to pass through these bitter trials. But in their
travails, the Lord himself was at their side, ever helping and encouraging
them. Sometimes he was not there physically, as was the case during
Draupadi’s predicament, yet it was apparent that he had never abandoned
them even for a single moment.
As a means to overcome this setback, caused by the miracle, Duryodhana
crudely bared his thigh, exposed it to Draupadi, and invited her to sit on his
lap. This was the ﬁnal insult. She could bear it no longer. A dreadful curse
broke from her lips, “One day, O Duryodhana, those thighs of yours will be
broken on the battleﬁeld, and you will die a dreadful death, with vultures
and wolves howling around you!”
Bhima, too, could contain himself no longer. Glaring balefully at
Duryodhana, he swore, “May I never reach heaven if I do not kill all the
Kauravas single-handed. As for Duryodhana, I shall break his thighs ﬁrst
and then kill him! I swear this by Krishna, Durga, and Shiva. I also swear
that I shall drink the blood of the wicked Dussasana after killing him and tie
Panchali’s hair with my bloodstained hands. Until I achieve this, I shall not
drink water with my hands or in a vessel, but only from the splash made by
hitting my mace on a water surface!”
Arjuna now took a dreadful oath to kill Karna, Sahadeva to kill Shakuni,
and Nakula to kill Uluka, Shakuni’s son. Finally, Draupadi took another
oath, “My hair will remain untied until Bhima anoints it with the blood of
Dussasana, and at that time the hair of the Kaurava widows will droop
down in bereavement.”
The Kauravas roared with laughter at hearing these seemingly improbable
events. Yet the law of karma is always just, and terrible is the effect of the
curses of noble people who have been unfairly wounded. Time was to give
truth to the words of the Pandavas.
Hearing all these terrible oaths, the blind king was alarmed and shaken
out of his stupor. “Stop! Stop!” he cried. “Release the empress Draupadi!”
Heedless of his father’s commands, Duryodhana ordered Draupadi to go
inside and attend to his wife.
With great dignity, Draupadi answered, “I will go only after having
bowed to the elders. Due to the forcible way in which I was dragged here, I
was unable to do so when I entered, but let it not be said that the empress of
Indraprastha was lacking in respect.”
Slowly, she went forward and bent before Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, and
Dhritarashtra. Terriﬁed by the oaths of the Pandavas, the latter said, “Ask
for two boons, my daughter, and I shall grant them to you, for it is because
of your nobility that God himself has saved you today. Immediately, she
asked for the release of her husbands together with their kingdom.
“So be it,” said the king.
Before Duryodhana could remonstrate, Vidura hustled the Pandavas into
their chariots and whipped up the horses. Duryodhana ﬂew at his father and
swore to kill himself (commit suicide) unless the Pandavas were brought
back and restored what he had so handily won.
Dhritarashtra demurred, but as usual gave in, and the Pandavas had hardly
reached Indraprastha before they were recalled and invited to a single throw
of dice by the king, who had forced his son to come to some sort of
compromise. The losers were to go into exile for twelve years and then to
spend the thirteenth year incognito in some city. If they were discovered
during this ﬁnal period of one year, they were to repeat the entire process.
Duryodhana agreed, for he did not expect the Pandavas to return alive or to
remain undiscovered during the ﬁnal period of one year. A fast messenger
was sent after the Pandavas with the command that Dhritarashtra had
ordered them to return. Despite the pleas of his brothers and Draupadi,
Yudhishtira foolishly asked the horses to be turned back, for he insisted that
he would not go against the dictates of dharma and disobey his elders.
Once again, he was challenged by Duryodhana and Shakuni, and the
terms of the wager were explained. Dhritarashtra hastened to add that half
the kingdom would be given back the moment they returned. Yudhishtira
said not a word. He gave one last look of appeal at his grandfather’s face, as
if to conﬁrm what had been said. There was a look of mute appeal on
Bhishma’s countenance, as if begging forgiveness and asking him to
understand. Yudhishtira thought he understood. For many years, Bhishma
had had but one thought and that was to preserve the unity of the Kuru
dynasty against all odds. Despite many upheavals and in the face of
insurmountable obstacles, he had done so, even at the cost of his own
happiness. Now he realized that unless the Pandavas were removed,
Duryodhana would surely ﬁnd a method of killing them. He had tried many
times in the past and had failed, but who knew when he would succeed?
Exile was the only way to avert this tragedy. Thus, the last game was played
and lost, and Yudhishtira agreed to go, without so much as a murmur. “I
shall abide by the elders’ advice,” he said. At that time, to the astonishment
of everyone, Draupadi insisted that he should gamble just once more for
their freedom, for she said that she wanted her husbands to go into exile as
free men and not as slaves. Duryodhana and Shakuni insultingly asked what
Yudhishtira had left to stake.
The latter answered, “I shall stake all my punya (spiritual merit) that I
have accumulated so far.”
Duryodhana was elated and, being sure of the outcome, pledged all
Yudhishtira had lost in addition to their freedom. J ust before the dice was
thrown, Draupadi reminded Yudhishtira to chant the twelve names of Lord
Krishna and thus invoke his blessings before throwing. For the ﬁrst and last
time, to the wonder of all, Yudhishtira won! With his usual high code of
honor, he refused to take back the kingdom and accepted only their
freedom. His kingdom, he said, he would claim only after the successful
completion of their thirteenth year of exile. Thus, thanks to Draupadi’s
devotion, the Pandavas could depart with dignity. They left with their wife
and their chief priest, Dhaumya, discarding their kingly apparel and clad in
deerskin and bark. They, who until now had been clothed in all the ﬁnery of
the kingdom, were now clad in the attire of the ascetics. Inscrutable are the
ways in which divine justice works.
As they left, many omens were seen, boding ill for the Kauravas. Mother
Kunti went to live with Vidura, for she refused to stay in Duryodhana’s
palace. Draupadi’s ﬁve children by the ﬁve brothers were sent to their
grandparents at Panchala, and Subhadra went to Dwaraka. Followed by a
host of weeping citizens and Brahmins, the Pandavas reached the outskirts
of the city. Yudhishtira persuaded the citizens to return, but the Brahmins
refused to go, since they said it would be wrong on their part to live in a
kingdom ruled by an unrighteous king and insisted on accompanying him to
the forest.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Narayanaya Namaha!
2 2
T he E x ile
Pitha twam, Matha Twam, Dayithathanayastwam Priyasuhrit,
Twameva twam Mitram, Gururasi Gathischasi Jagatham.
Twadiyasthwath Bhrityasthava Parijana Shwadgathiraham,
Prapannaschaivam Sathyahampi Thavaivasmi Hi Bhara.
Thou alone art my father, thou alone art my mother, thou alone my
beloved son and my dearest friend;  thou alone my one conﬁdant
and my preceptor. Thou refuge of all the worlds, I am thine, thy
servant, thy attendant. Thou art my goal, I take refuge in thee. This
being so, I am verily a burden on thee.
The Pandavas traveled fast. They wanted to get away as far possible from
Hastinapura. Yudhishtira’s ﬁrst consideration after leaving the city was how
to feed the hordes of Brahmins who had followed him. On Dhaumya’s
advice, he prayed to the sun god, Surya, and procured the akshaya patra, or
the bowl of plenty, from which any amount of food of any type could be
had. The only condition was that Draupadi should eat only after everyone
else ate, like the ideal Indian housewife, for after she ate, nothing more
could be procured from the bowl for that time. With this they set out to the
forest called Kamyaka. Vidura, who had been harshly treated by both
Duryodhana and Dhritarashtra and asked to get out, met them there and
spent some time with them. However, Dhritarashtra could not live for long
without his stepbrother and sent Sanjaya to bring him back, much to
Duryodhana’s chagrin. Sage Vyasa and Sage Maitreya were the next to visit
them. They went back to Hastinapura and tried to advise Dhritarashtra.
Vyasa said, “Your sons are doomed. The banished princes will nurse their
grievance and return with a vengeance to destroy you, as well as the
kingdom. Coax your son to make peace with them, and let there be an
amicable settlement.” Dhritarashtra hemmed and hawed and did nothing, as
usual.
Next, Maitreya tried to reason with Duryodhana, but the latter insulted
him by smiting his thigh, and the sage cursed him, “Bhima’s oath will come
true, and you will lose your life when your thighs are broken by him!”
All these events had taken place while Krishna was ﬁghting with Salva.
As soon as he heard the news, he went himself to the Kamyaka forest
accompanied by all the heroes of the Vrishni clan, as well as by Draupadi’s
brother Drishtadyumna. They were pained to see the condition in which the
emperor was living. Krishna tested Yudhishtira by offering to help him get
his kingdom back immediately, but the latter refused, for he did not want to
break his word.
When she saw Krishna and her brother, Draupadi’s grief was intensiﬁed.
Their righteous anger was such a contrast to her meek husbands. “O
J anardana! I am the favored queen of the ﬁve Pandavas, who are the
greatest heroes in the world. I am the daughter of the king of Panchala and
the sister of the heroic Drishtadyumna, yet see what they did to me. I was
dragged by the hair and insulted in front of the elders! What do I care if
Yudhishtira is called the sole monarch of Earth, when my hair, which was
puriﬁed by the sacred waters of the Rajasuya, was grabbed by Dussasana?
Had it not been for your grace, I would have been completely disrobed in
full view of my heroic husbands!” She had been bottling up her emotions
all these days, but when she saw the look of compassion on the Lord’s face,
she broke into uncontrollable sobs. Krishna cupped her face in his lotus
palms and wiped away her tears with the hem of his upper robe.
“O Panchali,” he said. “Be patient for a while. At the end of thirteen
years, the women of the Kuru clan will weep as you are weeping now.
When Arjuna’s arrows quench their thirst in Karna’s blood, they will weep.
When Bhima’s hands are red with Dussasana’s blood, they will weep. When
Duryodhana lies on the battleﬁeld with his thighs broken, they will weep.
Nothing can stop this inexorable law of cause and effect—the law of karma.
The heavens may fall, the snowy peaks of Himavan may tumble down, and
the seas may dry up. Earth may split into a million splinters, but my words
will never fail. Therefore, dry your tears, my dear sister, and try to forgive
your husbands, who were powerless to help you.” After this, he comforted
Yudhishtira and the others and returned to Dwaraka, promising to come
whenever they needed him.
Dhaumya now advised them to go to Dvaitavana, which was a
picturesque forest more like an overgrown garden, ﬁlled with ﬂowers, fruit,
and beautiful peacocks and birds. It was also the abode of many rishis.
Yudhishtira lived in these sylvan surroundings as happily as he had in
Indraprastha. He was a great soul who had risen above the dualities of life
and basked as happily in his adversity as he had in his prosperity. He
enjoyed the company of the sages and realized that suffering was a
necessary condition of the spiritual life and that true greatness lay in the
ability to rise above it.
The great sage Markandeya came to them at that time and told them the
story of Sri Rama, the son of Dasaratha, who had to spend fourteen years in
exile in the forest with his brother and his beloved queen, who was
abducted by Ravana, the demon king of Lanka.
Hearing of the carefree life the Pandavas were enjoying in the forest,
Duryodhana was once again troubled by his former ailment, jealousy. He
racked his brains to ﬁnd some method of destroying them, if possible. At
that time, the sage Durvasa came to the palace accompanied by his ten
thousand disciples and demanded hospitality for as long as he chose to stay.
He worried Duryodhana constantly with his unreasonable demands at odd
times of the day, for the sage took great pleasure in testing people.
Duryodhana bent backward in his efforts to please him, for his bad temper
was proverbial and he did not want to risk a curse! At last, Durvasa
pronounced himself satisﬁed and told him to ask for a boon. The crafty
Duryodhana immediately thought of a plan to get the sage to curse the
Pandavas and thus bring about their downfall.
Very meekly, Duryodhana said, “O holy one! My cousins, the Pandavas,
live a simple life in the forest. Do please go there at about three in the
afternoon with your disciples, for they will consider themselves blessed if
holy ones like you visit them.”
“So be it,” said Durvasa and promptly went to the Kamyaka forest at a
time when the Pandavas and their retinue had already ﬁnished their meal for
the day. Draupadi had eaten and cleaned the vessel after eating. Her heart
sank when she saw the sage and his hungry-looking disciples. She had not
only eaten but had washed and put the bowl away. Durvasa informed
Yudhishtira that he would go to the river with his disciples, take a bath, and
thus return with a healthy appetite for lunch. Draupadi was in a real
dilemma, and as usual when desperate, she appealed to Krishna.
“O Krishna, you are the tree that shelters all good people and the savior of
those in distress. You alone can remove the sorrows of your devotees. You,
O Lord, are my sole refuge.”
So saying, she sank to the ground in an attitude of utter supplication. As
she opened her eyes, she saw the beauteous form of the Lord approaching
her with his usual tender smile. She ran forward to explain her predicament,
but he brushed her aside and said, “O Panchali, I’m so hungry. Give me
something to eat ﬁrst and then we’ll talk.”
“O Lord,” she pleaded, “this is not the time for joking. I’ve already eaten
and washed the akshaya patra, and the sage Durvasa and his ten thousand
disciples have come. There is not a grain of food in our humble hermitage.
What should I do?”
“Never mind,” Krishna said reassuringly. “Being a princess and most
unused to hard work, I’m sure you would not have washed the bowl very
well. There must be something left in it for me. Go and get it.”
Sadly, Draupadi went to get the bowl, which she had scoured and put
away a few moments ago. Krishna searched the bottom very carefully and
brought out a microscopic bit of spinach leaf and a grain of rice, which
were sticking to the bottom, much to Draupadi’s shame. Placing his
precious ﬁnd in his palm, he asked Draupadi to pour a little Ganga water
into it and drank the concoction with evident relish.
“Ah! Now I’m replete,” he said. “Let Bhima go and invite the sage and
his disciples for their meal.”
“But, Lord, what shall we feed them?” Draupadi pleaded.
“Never mind all that. Let Bhima go,” said Krishna.
Bhima went to the riverbank to ﬁnd that the sage and his disciples had
ﬁnished their bath and were burping as if they had just had a full meal.
When Bhima invited them, they protested that they could not eat anything
since they suddenly felt very full. In fact, they had been on the verge of
creeping off, without returning to the hermitage, for they feared that a
hearty meal had been prepared for them to which they would not be able to
do justice. Durvasa, of course, realized by his yogic powers that the reason
for all these untoward happenings was Duryodhana’s jealousy. He was so
angry at having been made a stooge that he cursed Duryodhana with a
speedy end and blessed the Pandavas with all success in their mission.
When Draupadi asked for an explanation for this miracle, the Lord
explained that he had eaten the morsel with the bhavana, or attitude, that he
was the Lord of the universe, and immediately the entire universe with all
its beings was simultaneously satisﬁed and felt replete. He blessed Draupadi
and the Pandavas and left for Dwaraka.
The Pandavas spent six years in the forest very happily and had many
adventures. Vyasa advised Arjuna to do tapasya to Lord Shiva and procure
the formidable Pasupata weapon from him. The brothers had perforce to be
separated, and Arjuna went and did severe tapas to Lord Shiva. Hearing of
Arjuna’s tapasya, Duryodhana compelled a rakshasa friend of his called
Muka to take on the form of a wild boar and kill him. Muka agreed and
went to the forest. At the same time, Lord Shiva and his consort Parvati
came in the guise of a hunting couple in order to bless Arjuna. They stalked
the boar that had come to kill Arjuna. As the boar charged, Arjuna woke
from his tapas and discharged an arrow at it. Simultaneously, an arrow from
the divine hunter also pierced the boar. It fell down dead, and Arjuna
claimed the kill as his own, while the hunter insisted that it was killed by his
arrow. Th argument soon led to a duel. Arjuna’s arrows seemed powerless
to penetrate the hunter’s skin. Soon he found his quiver exhausted and his
bowstring cut by the hunter. In a fury, he ﬂew at him and smote him with a
blow from his bow. It is said that everyone felt the pain of the blow, for
Shiva was none but the Supreme. Without a change in his demeanor, he
chided Arjuna, “How unfair of you to strike me with your bow. I can do
likewise but I shall refrain. Come, let us now wrestle with each other.”
So they grappled with each other, and Arjuna felt himself imbued with
new energy at the mere touch of the Lord’s hands. But though Arjuna
fought gallantly, his blows made no mark on the hunter, who carried on
with ease. Sore and perplexed, Arjuna hastily made an image, a lingam, of
Lord Shiva and worshipped it with a garland. He then turned around and
saw the hunter standing before him adorned with the garland he had just
placed reverently round the lingam. Arjuna then recognized the hunter to be
none other than his beloved God, Shiva, accompanied by his consort Parvati
and their son Kartikeya! He threw himself at Shiva’s feet and begged his
forgiveness. Shiva was well pleased with his devotee’s courage and
expertise in warfare and told him to ask for a boon. Arjuna was a true
devotee and humbly said, “I have been blessed with a vision of your divine
form. I have wrestled with you and your feet have touched me. I am thus
thrice blessed. What more can I want?”
But at the Lord’s insistence, he asked for the Pasupata weapon. Shiva
gave it to him and warned him of its destructive potency. He told him to use
it only in desperate situations.
“You will be able to defeat your enemies, and helped by Krishna, you will
cleanse the world of its atrocities,” he said.
After this, Arjuna’s father, Indra, requested him to accompany him to his
heavenly abode in order to help him defeat certain demons with the
Pasupata. He did so, and the grateful Indra loaded him with many divine
weapons and blessings. However, he had managed to invoke a curse from
the celestial beauty, Urvashi, for having resisted her overtures. She cursed
him that, having behaved like a eunuch, he would have to spend one year of
his life as one! This, however, proved to be a blessing in disguise, for he
made good use of it in their thirteenth year of exile, which had to be spent
incognito.
After Arjuna’s departure, the Pandavas spent their time with great
difﬁculty, for he was a general favorite and always managed to keep them in
good spirits with his ready wit. On top of this, Yudhishtira had to put up
with Bhima’s and Draupadi’s constant nagging that it was ill-beﬁtting a
Kshatriya to take things so meekly. At this time, sage Brihadvasa came to
them and cheered Yudhishtira by teaching him the royal art of dice playing,
called akshahridaya, so that no one would ever be able to defeat him again.
Then came sage Vyasa who advised them to go on a long pilgrimage. First
they went to the sacred forest called Naimisha and then gradually wended
their way along the western coast of the peninsula until they came to
Prabhasa, the port adjoining Dwaraka, where they were met by Krishna and
Balarama. The latter was furious with Duryodhana and urged Yudhishtira to
ﬁght the Kauravas then and there. Krishna said, “Brother, Yudhishtira is
advising patience not because he is not powerful but because he wants to
keep his word. Truth is greater to him than wealth. Let us respect his
wishes. The time is not too distant when he will regain what he has lost.”
After spending many happy days with their beloved friends, the Pandavas
wended their way northward until they reached Bindusar, which was the
source of the Ganga. Then they proceeded to the ashrama called Badri,
where the ancient sages Nara and Narayana were said to be meditating.
Here they were overtaken by a terriﬁc storm, in which Draupadi nearly
died. Yudhishtira took her head on his lap, while Nakula and Sahadeva
gently stroked her torn and blistered feet.
Yudhishtira, in a burst of self-condemnation, said, “O Panchali! Your
father gave you to us with the promise that the Pandavas would give you
great happiness. But, my poor wife, after marrying us, you have known
nothing but pain. Please try to forgive this erring husband of yours.”
Draupadi did her best to comfort the king. Soon the beauty of the
ashrama crept into their hearts, and they almost forgot their woes. One day,
a beautiful ﬂower with an intoxicating perfume was wafted by the wind and
laid at Draupadi’s feet. She begged Bhima to get her more of these ﬂowers.
Bhima was only too happy to oblige and set out like a hound, snifﬁng the
air and following the perfume of the ﬂower. Very soon, he found his path
blocked by a gigantic monkey. He requested the ape to let him pass, but the
monkey said, “I’m too old and feeble to move, but if you like you may
remove my tail from your path and carry on.”
With a tolerant smile, Bhima tried to lift the monkey’s tail with his left
hand, but found that it would not budge an inch. Next, he used both hands,
with the same result. Surprised at this, he used his mace to dislodge the tail
and found his mace cracking! He went and prostrated to the huge simian
and begged him to tell him who he was. The monkey smiled and said, “I’m
your brother Hanuman, the son of Vayu.”
At this, Bhima fell at his feet and begged his pardon. Hanuman clasped
him in his hairy arms and assured him that he would do all that he could to
ensure their success in the coming war. He offered to sit on Arjuna’s
ﬂagstaff and frighten the enemy, thus helping them to win the war. The
brothers embraced each other, and Bhima went on his way. Hanuman had
told him that the name of the ﬂower was Saugandika, and it grew in the
garden of Kubera, the god of wealth. Kubera’s retinue called the yakshas,
allowed Bhima to pluck the ﬂowers, and he returned to Draupadi and
covered her with the ﬂowers she had coveted.
It was now ﬁve years since they had parted from Arjuna, and they were
most anxious to meet him again. It was at Badrikashrama that the glad
reunion took place. After hearing about all of Arjuna’s wonderful
adventures, the Pandavas set out on their return journey to the plains.
Eleven years of their exile had passed. Only two more years were left.
Thus, the Pandavas passed through the ﬁres of austerity and hardship,
keeping their minds ever on the Lord, growing in wisdom, humility, and
strength. On one occasion, they decided to invite Krishna for lunch. Arjuna
thought he could summon him any moment, but found that all his prayers
and pleas were of no avail. Then Bhima ﬂung up his mighty mace into the
air and standing directly below the falling weapon he said, “Krishna, if you
do not come immediately, I shall die beneath the weight of this mace!” The
Lord appeared immediately, and Arjuna, who had always prided himself on
being the Lord’s favorite, realized the worth of Bhima’s devotion.
On another occasion, the Lord visited them, accompanied by his wife
Satyabhama. When the latter saw how her ﬁve husbands doted on Draupadi,
she was impelled to ask her for a hint as to how she managed to please all
ﬁve, when she herself found it difﬁcult to manage just one! Draupadi smiled
and said, “My greatest happiness lies in attending to the slightest wants of
my husbands. I treat all ﬁve alike. Their happiness is my happiness, their
sorrow my sorrow.”
This episode was no doubt engineered by the Lord, for Satyabhama was a
self-willed woman with no fear of voicing her opinions. Krishna loved her
dearly and did not think it necessary to curb her high spirits;  yet he did want
her to hear the qualiﬁcations of a perfect wife from a woman like Draupadi,
who also had a mind of her own. Draupadi was far from being a meek and
mild creature, yet she managed to get her own way by pleasing her
husbands, not by dominating them. Thus, she kept her own personality
intact, yet remained a perfect wife.
Duryodhana’s days of peace were coming to a close. In order to cheer him
up, Karna came up with a brilliant suggestion. “My friend,” he said, “you
are now lord of the world. Why do you have to worry about the fact that the
Pandavas’ exile is coming to a close? They are wandering about in the
forests like beasts. Come, let us make a trip to the forest of Dvaitavana on
the pretext of inspecting our cattle. Seeing the splendor of your retinue, the
Pandavas will become green with envy, and when that woman Draupadi
sees our wives dressed in all their ﬁnery, she will be livid. Come, let’s go
and watch the fun.”
This scheme was joyfully accepted by Duryodhana, and all the Kaurava
brothers set out with their wives on a pleasure trip. When they heard that
the Pandavas were camped near a lake, they decided to go there for a swim.
But a gandharva (celestial singer) was already sporting in the lake with his
wives, and he ordered Duryodhana’s men to tell their master that he would
not tolerate any disturbance. Duryodhana was highly scornful of this order
and marched toward the lake, but both Duryodhana and Karna were routed,
not to mention the others. The gandharva ﬁnally grabbed the king by his
hair and dragged him off. Their women were also taken away. In despair,
Duryodhana’s men ran to Yudhishtira, told them their shameful story, and
begged him to rescue their king. Bhima refused to go at ﬁrst, but
Yudhishtira insisted, and the brothers set out on their rescue operation. After
a preliminary skirmish, the gandharva revealed himself to Arjuna as
Chitrasena, his friend who had taught him music and dancing during his
sojourn in Indra’s heaven. The Kuru monarch and his brothers and women
were handed over to the Pandavas, much to Duryodhana’s chagrin.
Yudhishtira released him and advised him not to do such spiteful deeds
again. Duryodhana was ﬁlled with anger and sorrow. Not only was he
unable to humiliate the Pandavas, as he had wanted, but they had forced
him to eat humble pie. In fact, he owed his very life to Yudhishtira’s
generosity. He felt it would be better to die than to return to Hastinapura
and was all set to take his own life. Karna and Dussasana made him desist
from this unworthy act and took him back to the city.
Once, when the Pandavas had gone out hunting, Duryodhana’s brother-in-
law, J ayadratha, passed by. Seeing Draupadi at the door of their ashrama,
he was smitten by her beauty and forcibly abducted her in his chariot. The
Pandavas returned and gave chase. Though J ayadratha’s forces were
formidable, they were no match for the fury of the Pandavas. Bhima was all
set to stamp him to death like a viper, but Arjuna dissuaded him and
reminded him that he was the husband of Dussala, Duryodhana’s little
sister, and should be spared.
J ayadratha was too ashamed to return to his city. He remained in the
forest, did intense tapasya to Lord Shiva, and asked him for the boon of
being able to vanquish the Pandavas.
Lord Shiva replied, “You will never be able to vanquish the Pandavas,
who are protected by Lord Vishnu in his avatara as Krishna. But I will give
you this boon: that you will be able to do them some grave injury.”
J ayadratha had to be satisﬁed with this, and he returned to his city
determined to do some harm to the Pandavas, forgetting the fact that he was
the one who had wronged them.
In their twelfth year of exile, the Pandavas were tested severely by
Yamadharma, Yudhishtira’s father, the god of righteousness. He created a
poisoned lake to which the brothers went for water, and all four of the
younger ones died by drinking the water. At last, Yudhishtira went to ﬁnd
out what happened and saw them all lying dead on the shore of the lake. A
voice from the lake informed him of how they had died and offered to bring
them back, provided he answer the questions that were put to him.
Yudhishtira agreed, and the yaksha (a celestial being), began questioning
him on every aspect of ethics and righteousness, all of which Yudhishtira
answered perfectly. Some of the questions are worth noting.
“What makes a Brahmin?”
“Virtue and good behavior, not birth or education.”
“What is the most surprising thing in the world?”
“The fact that day after day everyone sees death occurring, yet all of us
feel that we will never die.”
“Who is the one who can be called wealthy?”
“The one who treats alike happiness and sorrow, pain and pleasure, loss
and gain, past and future.”
Thus, Yudhishtira answered many such questions, put by the yaksha, with
wisdom and humility, for he knew that the lives of his brothers depended on
his answers. At last, the voice said, “I’m pleased with your answers, and I
shall grant you the life of one of your brothers. Whom shall it be?”
Unhesitatingly, Yudhishtira asked for Nakula’s life.
The voice enquired, “Why do you not ask for the life of Bhima or Arjuna,
who are your own brothers?”
Yudhishtira replied calmly, “I cannot swerve from dharma even for the
sake of affection. Among my mother’s sons, at least I am alive. To balance
this, let one of the sons of my stepmother, Madri, also be brought to life.”
The voice now materialized itself as Yamadharma, the god of death and
righteousness. In order to test the integrity of his son, he had devised the
poisoned lake, and he was extremely pleased by the answers given by
Yudhishtira. He restored all his brothers to him and said, “I assure you that
no one will recognize you in your thirteenth year of exile. But remember
that both victory and righteousness will ever prevail wherever Lord Krishna
is, so you must follow him in all things.”
Thus, their twelfth year of exile came to a dramatic conclusion.
Yudhishtira sent off his retinue of servants and followers to Dwaraka and
his preceptor Dhaumya to Drupada, for he did not want any of them to
know of their whereabouts. The brothers discussed the matter among
themselves and decided to spend their thirteenth year incognito in the city
of Upaplavya, at the court of Virata, king of the country of Matsya. Each
one chose a disguise and an occupation ﬁtting to his temperament.
Yudhishtira, the true Brahmin, called himself Kanka, a Brahmin who was
skilled in the art of dice playing and decided to become a courtier. Bhima
chose to call himself Valahala, a person skilled in the culinary arts, and
apply for the post of cook at the palace. In his spare time, he could amuse
people by wrestling. Arjuna utilized Urvasi’s curse, which turned out to be a
blessing, for he could go as a eunuch called Brahannala to teach music and
dancing to the king’s daughter, Uttara. Nakula, who was skilled in the
equestrian arts, took the name of Damagranthi. He could tame the king’s
horses and proposed to become master of the stable. Sahadeva, who was an
expert on cattle, called himself Tantripala and applied for a post in the
king’s dairy. Draupadi had perforce to take on the occupation of the queen’s
companion and dresser and called herself Sairandhri. Having decided on
their plans, they concealed their weapons inside the hide of a dead cow and
hid the bundle on top of a tree in the middle of a burial ground so that
inquisitive eyes would not dare to probe too closely.
They took a fond farewell of each other and proceeded to the city of
Upaplavya separately. They were easily accepted by the king in their new
identities. Sudeshna, the queen, was at ﬁrst reluctant to accept Draupadi, for
she was frightened that her husband might fall a victim to her charms. But
the latter said that she was an expert in all matters pertaining to a lady’s
toilette and gave the name of Satyabhama, Lord Krishna’s wife, as
reference. She also hinted that she was married to ﬁve gandharvas who
would have no compunction in throttling the life out of anyone who dared
to molest her. Thus, having set the queen’s mind at rest, Draupadi was
employed.
Though Virata was the king of Matsya, all power was vested in the hands
of his commander-in-chief, Kichaka, who was also his brotherin-law, the
younger brother of his queen. Since he was an expert in warfare, all
kingdoms including that of the Kurus treated him with respect and fear.
During the ﬁrst ten months of the Pandavas’ stay, Kichaka had been away
on one of his numerous military expeditions. As soon as he returned, he
went to his sister’s apartments loaded with gifts for her. Unfortunately, he
set his eyes on Draupadi and was smitten by her charms. But all his
persuasions failed to entice the “maid,” whom he expected to be an easy
prey. Poor Draupadi had to suffer innumerable insults from him. He refused
to take no for an answer, as he could not believe that a mere maidservant
could be totally impervious to his wealth and personal charm. At last,
unable to bear it any longer, she appealed to Bhima to save her.
They concocted a plan. Panchali invited Kichaka to visit her in the night
in a certain room. Kichaka was thrilled to ﬁnd that at last the citadel had
fallen, as he had fully expected. He went attired in all his ﬁnery, but Bhima
had taken Draupadi’s place, and instead of two soft arms, he found two
hands of steel, gripping him in a stranglehold from which he could not
escape alive. The next morning, everyone was horriﬁed to ﬁnd Kichaka
dead and questioned Draupadi, who hinted that the deed might have been
done by her gandharva husbands, since the queen had refused to help her.
The year was coming to an end, and Duryodhana began to get desperate,
for his spies had been unable to discover the Pandavas’ whereabouts. It was
at this time that he got news that Kichaka, the invincible general of the land
of Matsya, had been strangled to death by an unknown assailant, on account
of a woman. Duryodhana was jubilant when he heard this, for he was sure
that the assailant could be none other than Bhima. He made a pact with his
allies, the Trigartas, and they decided to make a combined raid on the
kingdom of Matsya to steal Virata’s prize cattle. Now that Kichaka, the
commander-inchief of the army, was dead, the country was defenseless. The
Trigatas were to charge from the south and lure Virata’s army away, while
the Kauravas approached from the north and stole the cattle. Duryodhana
was sure that he would be able to unmask the Pandavas, who would
undoubtedly come to the aid of their benefactor, King Virata.
The attack from the south threw the king into a panic, but Yudhishtira
offered to go with the cook, the master of the stable, and the keeper of the
cattle in order to repulse the Trigartas. Virata was persuaded to lend them
some armor, and the entire army went with them, defeating the enemy
easily. In the meantime, as planned, the Kauravas were attacking from the
north, and this news was brought to a city peopled by women and children
alone. This time, Draupadi came to the rescue and advised the queen to
entrust her young son, Uttara Kumara, into the capable hands of the dancing
teacher Brahannala, who she claimed was an excellent charioteer. “With
him wielding the reins, your son will surely defeat the invaders,” said
Draupadi.
After a show of reluctance, Arjuna consented to drive the chariot for the
young prince, and the two set off in great haste to the north. The
fainthearted prince had to be forced to accompany him. But as soon as they
left the city gates, Arjuna exchanged places with him and told him to have
no fear, for he would do the ﬁghting, provided the prince charioted him
properly. This the prince agreed to do. So Arjuna took him to the tree where
the weapons had been hidden and took out his bow, Gandiva, and his quiver
of inexhaustible arrows. It is said that the day on which Arjuna retrieved his
bow was Vijayadasami day, the victorious tenth day of the yearly worship
of the goddess Durga. The day also marked the end of their thirteenth year
of exile.
Thus armed, they proceeded toward the north, where the cattle rustlers
were rounding up the prize cattle. Uttara Kumara quaked with fear when he
saw the advancing host, but Arjuna bolstered up his courage and told him to
drive on. Like an avenging angel, Arjuna fell upon the Kuru hordes, who
recognized him despite his strange garb. Seated in the chariot driven by the
trembling prince, Arjuna wrought havoc in the ranks of the marauding army
and rescued the cattle. He fought with the full fury of a man wronged, and
the Kauravas were forced to retreat. Duryodhana turned tail and ﬂed, but
Arjuna pursued him, taunted him with cowardice, and forced him to ﬁght.
He was severely wounded. Arjuna desisted from killing him, for he was
reserving him for Bhima, but in order to humble his pride, he knocked off
Duryodhana’s crown.
Duryodhana shouted at him, “All of you will have to go back into the
forest for another thirteen years, for I have discovered you!”
Arjuna ﬂung back, “Consult your elders. They will conﬁrm that the
stipulated period of thirteen years ended an hour ago. But do not be afraid;  I
shall spare your life since I do not kill cowards in ﬂight. Moreover, my
brother Bhima has sworn to kill you!”
Now Karna came forward and challenged him, but Arjuna forced him to
admit defeat and Karna had to retreat.
Thus, having routed the Kuru army, the victorious pair drove back to the
tree, where Arjuna replaced the weapons. They then drove back to the
palace. The king was quite bewildered by the extraordinary happenings of
the day. He congratulated his young son on his brilliant victory, but the
prince confessed that it was the dancing master who had saved the day!
This puzzled the king even further, so Yudhishtira explained the whole story
to him. The king was very happy that he had unwittingly provided a haven
for the famous Pandavas. He offered to give his daughter, Uttara, in
marriage to Arjuna, but the latter refused the offer, since she was his pupil
and was thus in the position of a daughter to him. However, in order to
cement the alliance with the Matsya kingdom, he accepted her as a
daughter-in-law and bride for his son, Abhimanyu, the nephew of Lord
Krishna. This offer was joyfully received, and a message was sent to
Dwaraka. Abhimanyu was a handsome youth and a brilliant archer, and he
came, accompanied by Krishna and the other Yadavas.
The Pandavas went with Virata to the outskirts of the city to welcome
Krishna and Balarama. They fell at his feet and said, “By your grace, O
Lord, we have ﬁnished the thirteen years. You are our sole refuge. We will
do whatever you want us to do. You mean everything to us.” Krishna was
overcome with pity when he looked at his dear cousins. He lifted up the
weeping Draupadi, dried her tears, and told her, “O Panchali, do not weep.
The time for tears is over. The day is near when smiles should come back to
your face. I will set about fulﬁlling the promise I made in the Kamyaka
forest, thirteen years ago.”
The Pandavas had thus patiently and brilliantly gone through their period
of exile. They had undergone terrible hardships, but their suffering had only
helped to cleanse and purify them. They had met many great sages and
received their blessings. Arjuna had procured numerous divine weapons.
They had visited all the holy and sacred spots of Bharatavarsha and had
emerged nobler than before. They were now ready to face whatever the
fates held in store for them. They were conﬁdent that with the help of the
Lord they would be able to support the cause of righteousness and emerge
victorious.
He who worships me constantly and ex clusively through the
performance of his duties, knowing my presence in all beings, soon
attains steadfast devotion.
LORD KRISHNA IN UDDHAVA GITA,
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Jagadeeshvaraya Namaha!
2 3
T he L ord as Ambassador
Ananyaschintayanto Mam Ye Jana Paryupasathe,
Thesham Nityabhiyuktanam, Yogakshemam Vahamyaham.
I shall always look after the maintenance of the material and
spiritual welfare of those who think of me constantly and worship
me with single-pointed devotion.
King Virata allotted a village to the Pandavas from where they could
consult their friends and allies and decide on their future plan of action.
Yudhishtira invited Lord Krishna and his other well-wishers and requested
them to give their opinion as to how they could best proceed. Dhritarashtra
had promised to give them back their share of the kingdom as soon as they
came back from their thirteenth year of exile, but it was clear that
Duryodhana was in no mood to abide by this promise.
Lord Krishna was the ﬁrst to speak. “The Pandavas and Kauravas are
equally related to us, and the course of action that we adopt must be fair and
acceptable to both sides. The Pandavas have successfully fulﬁlled the terms
of their exile. Hence, I aver that the Kauravas, in turn, must keep to their
part of the bargain—restore half the kingdom to them and live in peace and
harmony.”
Balarama now spoke, “In my opinion, the completion of the thirteen years
of exile entitles the Pandavas to nothing more than their freedom and not
the kingdom. Duryodhana should be persuaded gently to give half the
kingdom, but he cannot be compelled to do so, since Yudhishtira knowingly
gambled away the Pandavas’ share. Now that he has enjoyed the whole
kingdom for so long, I think it unlikely that Duryodhana will agree to part
with it.”
The furious Satyaki now jumped up and said, “I do not agree at all. Our
virtuous cousin Yudhishtira was tricked into this gambling match. Even
though he knew that Shakuni was an adept at dice, he chivalrously accepted
the challenge since he did not wish to displease his uncle, and Dhritarashtra
had promised to give back half the kingdom after the successful completion
of the exile.”
The others unanimously agreed with this, and all promised their
wholehearted support. Lord Krishna wound up the discussion: “Peace is
always preferable to war,” he said, “because in a war neither party really
wins. Only suffering results. Thousands of women become widows. What
the Pandavas lost by gambling, let them try to redeem through an
ambassador of peace and goodwill. The messenger should be soft-spoken,
patient, and full of wisdom. The sage Uluka in Virata’s court has all these
qualities, so let him be sent as an ambassador of peace. In the meantime, let
us also be prepared mentally to ﬁght, in case Duryodhana refuses our
overtures of friendship.”
Uluka was thus sent to Hastinapura and was received by all the elders and
the Kauravas. He spoke, “I come as Yudhishtira’s ambassador of peace and
goodwill. He always adheres to dharma and wants nothing that is not
rightfully his. King Dhritarashtra promised to return his share of the
kingdom, on the Pandavas’ return from exile. He asks you to keep your
promise, therefore, and let your sons and nephews live in peace. But do not
make the mistake of thinking that Yudhishtira’s love of peace stems from
cowardice. The Pandavas are invincible in war.”
Bhishma now spoke, “Uluka has indeed spoken words ﬁlled with
wisdom. The Pandavas in their goodness will forget the wrongs that have
been done to them, as well as their terrible oaths. Their term of exile was
fully over before Arjuna revealed himself during the cattle raid. They now
have strong allies. It is best, therefore, that we should keep our side of the
bargain.”
Drona, Kripa, and Vidura all supported Bhishma and urged the king and
his sons to accept the terms.
Karna now jumped up and said, “The Pandavas have no rights at all. They
are just trying to frighten us. We are more than a match for them on the
battleﬁeld!”
Bhishma reprimanded him, “Enough of your bragging. Many times have
you boasted of defeating Arjuna, but he has defeated you twice, once at
Draupadi’s swayamvara and next at the recent cattle raid. Moreover,
remember that they are supported by the divine Lord Krishna.”
Dhritarashtra, torn between fear of the Pandavas and greed and love for
his sons, never seemed to have a mind of his own. Weakly, he told
Duryodhana to try to live amicably with his cousins.
Duryodhana, knowing his father’s lack of strength, said deﬁantly, “I shall
not yield to any threat! The Pandavas have no right to the kingdom, which
they gambled away voluntarily. I certainly made no promise to give it back
to them. Let them achieve on the battleﬁeld what they could not regain by
gambling and can certainly not regain through negotiation.”
Vidura and Drona tried to instill some sense into Duryodhana, but he did
not heed them and insolently staged a walkout from the assembly. Finally,
Dhritarashtra, trying to play for time, told Uluka to tell Yudhishtira that he
would send his prime minister, Sanjaya, with his ﬁnal decision. Uluka
returned with this message. Both sides realized that war was inevitable and
peace only a remote possibility, even though Yudhishtira was still hoping
for the best. Both camps started canvassing for support from all friendly
kings. Duryodhana, who had already made up his mind to ﬁght, was the
ﬁrst to approach the other kings, and he thus managed to collect eleven
akshauhinis, or divisions. The Pandavas, who were hoping till the last
moment for peace, could only muster up seven. An akshauhini consisted of
two thousand elephants, four thousand chariots, eight thousand cavalrymen,
and twenty thousand foot soldiers.
It may be wondered why the Lord did not will Duryodhana into agreeing
for peace. As has been said before, human beings are free to experience the
effects of their past karma, and the Divine will not deliberately thwart the
exercising of their free will. Of course, the Lord did his best to make
Duryodhana listen to reason, as will be seen, but when he refused to do so,
it became apparent that the course of dharma was at cross-purposes with
that of peace. Therefore, war became a necessity.
Shakuni was fully aware of Krishna’s prowess and urged Duryodhana to
go to Dwaraka to solicit his support. Yudhishtira dispatched Arjuna to
Dwaraka at the same time for the same purpose, since it was necessary to
make a formal request for the Yadava forces. It so happened that the cousins
arrived at the same time at Dwaraka.
The all-knowing Lord was prepared to meet them. He retired to his couch
and informed his attendants that he was not to be disturbed. A seat was
placed at the foot of the bed and one at the head. Duryodhana arrived a few
seconds before Arjuna, and thinking Krishna to be asleep, he took the seat
at the head of the couch, as beﬁtting a great monarch. Arjuna came in soon
after and stood patiently at the feet of the Lord, meditating on him.
Naturally, when Krishna opened his eyes, he saw Arjuna ﬁrst. “Ah, Arjuna!
What brings you here?” he asked.
At this, Duryodhana loudly announced his presence, so Krishna turned to
him and said, “Are you also here? To what do I owe the honor of these
visits?”
Duryodhana declared, “I have come to ask for your help in the impending
war. Both Arjuna and I are equally related to you, but since I was the ﬁrst to
arrive, you should pledge your support to me.”
The Lord smilingly replied, “I do not doubt your word, O King, that you
were the ﬁrst to arrive, but it so happened that I saw the son of Kunti ﬁrst.
But have no fear. I shall undoubtedly lend my support to both of you, since
I am equally related to both, as you have just claimed. Satyaki is determined
to support the Pandavas, and I do not know what my elder brother intends
to do. For my own part, I can promise to give the Yadava army led by
Kritavarma to one side, while I myself go to the other.”
Duryodhana interrupted before Arjuna could open his mouth. “That is not
fair. Everyone knows of your superhuman feats. The side you ﬁght on will
surely win, so you should promise not to take up arms during the battle.”
Krishna looked highly amused at this unfair suggestion, and he laughingly
turned to Arjuna and gave him ﬁrst choice. “Choose, O mighty-armed one!
Do you want me alone and unarmed or do you want the crack regiment of
the Yadava forces led by our general Kritavarma? The ﬁrst choice is yours,
for I have seen you ﬁrst. Moreover you are the younger of the two.”
Arjuna unhesitatingly chose the Lord, and Duryodhana, equally happy,
accepted the army. He had a few anxious moments while Krishna was
speaking and before Arjuna made his choice, but the Pandavas were always
quixotic and never knew how to grab an opportunity! He took a hasty
farewell of both of them and went to solicit the support of his guru,
Balarama, before Arjuna could approach him. Actually, he was quite certain
that Balarama would side with him, but he was doomed to disappointment,
for Balarama refused to ﬁght on either side. “I cannot ﬁght against Krishna,
who will be on the side of the Pandavas, and I cannot ﬁght against you, so
in the case of war being declared, I shall go on a pilgrimage. I hope you will
ﬁght according to the Kshatriya code of conduct that I have taught you.”
After Duryodhana had left, Krishna asked Arjuna, “Why did you choose
me when you knew I was not going to ﬁght?”
Arjuna replied, “My Lord, I only want you beside me, driving my chariot.
Then I can face the entire world and even the celestials themselves!”
Krishna smiled and blessed him, and thus it came to pass that though the
Lord did not take up arms during the war, he took the reins of Arjuna’s
chariot into his capable hands and led the Pandavas to victory, in the great
Mahabharata war that was to come.
Now Dhritarashtra sent Sanjaya to the Pandavas with his ﬁnal decision, as
he had promised, and made a last desperate attempt to seize the kingdom for
his sons without shedding their blood. Sanjaya went to the Pandava
Assembly and read out the message: “War is a terrible thing and both
parties will suffer. My sons are obstinate, but why do you, O Pandavas, who
follow the path of righteousness, not strive for peace? Spiritual pursuits are
more proﬁtable than material prosperity, and it ill becomes persons of your
worth to ﬁght for the sake of a kingdom. Far better for you to go and stay at
Dwaraka as Lord Krishna’s guests than give cause for a family feud.”
This remarkable speech on the quality of renunciation was heard with
amazement by all those present. Even Yudhishtira felt that this was another
stratagem by the wily king to grab the whole kingdom for his sons without
jeopardizing their lives, for he feared the wrath of the Pandavas in battle.
Instead of getting his sons to see reason, he was playing on Yudhishtira’s
love for dharma, which bordered almost on weakness.
Turning to Krishna, Yudhishtira spoke, “Weighing my own opinion, as
well as that of my brothers, I can come to no ﬁnal decision. I know not my
dharma in this situation. Therefore, abandoning all dharmas, I take refuge
at your lotus feet. I shall abide by your decision.”
Very soon after, the Lord was to give the same advice to Arjuna on the
battleﬁeld of Kurukshetra, but Yudhishtira forestalled him. Torn between
his love for peace and his desire to follow Kshatriya Dharma, which urged
him to ﬁght this righteous war, he placed the entire responsibility of the
decision at the feet of the Lord and made a complete surrender of his ego.
Krishna was ﬁlled with admiration for this great soul who was prepared to
live in humiliation for the sake of peace. But the Lord never forsook those
who took refuge in him, and even if they did not want to avenge their
wrongs, he saw to it that their wrongs were avenged.
Turning to Sanjaya, Krishna spoke on Yudhishtira’s behalf, “A thief who
steals wealth unseen and one who seizes it in open daylight are both to be
condemned, O Sanjaya! What is the difference between such a one and the
sons of Dhritarashtra? The Pandavas’ share is indisputable. Why should
they submit meekly and watch while that share is seized by the avaricious
Kauravas? Why should they be forced to accept my hospitality when they
have a kingdom of their own? A paternal kingdom is surely preferable to
sovereignty received from friends. When the daughter of Drupada, of fair
fame and unsullied reputation, was seized by Dussasana, all the Kurus, the
young and old, were present. You yourself were present, O Sanjaya! Yet
what stopped you from propounding your views on righteousness and
morality then? When Karna insultingly asked Draupadi to choose one of the
Kauravas as her husband, why did you not protest? When the sons of his
brother departed to the forest, clad in bark, why did the old king feel no
sorrow? But now, when the time has come to redeem his pledge and return
their kingdom, he talks of mercy and uprightness! Is he still bent on
watering this mighty tree of evil passions of which his son, Duryodhana, is
the trunk, Shakuni its branches, the Kauravas its blossoms, Karna its fruit,
and he himself its roots? Yudhishtira, on the other hand, is a big tree of
righteousness. Arjuna is its trunk, Bhima its branches, the sons of Madri its
ﬂowers and fruits, and I myself, with all dharma at my command, its
mighty roots. Tell the king that the sons of Pandu are as ready now as they
ever were to wait on him, if he chooses to follow the code of dharma. Let
him choose! Let him give back their patrimony and thus bring about peace,
or let him banish them and thus opt for war. In the meantime, I shall make a
last bid for peace, since I know that Yudhishtira wants it. I myself will come
to Hastinapura and try to make the king see reason!”
Hearing this, Sanjaya departed and faithfully reported what had transpired
and advised the king to act ﬁrmly and wisely. He also warned him about the
might of the Pandavas, aided as they were by Lord Krishna, hoping that fear
would act as a deterrent where wise counsel failed. Vidura, his stepbrother,
whose sayings were famous for their wisdom, as well as Bhishma and
Drona, all advised him, but still the king wavered. When he heard that
Krishna was coming as envoy to the Pandavas, he immediately started to
make preparations to welcome him in a grand manner, thus hoping to win
him over to his side. Vidura advised him not to make a fool of himself, for
Krishna was capable of sifting the chaff of ostentation from the wheat of
devotion, but the king was determined to give it a try. He told Vidura, “You
must personally supervise the reception to be given to Krishna. I want to
present him with many costly gifts.”
Vidura smiled scornfully. He could read his brother like a book. “I’m
really amused to hear your childish prattle. Do you think you can bribe
Krishna with your petty gifts? He is the greatest soul that has ever been
born on this Earth or will ever be born. What can you give him, who is the
Lord of all? Do not insult him, brother. If you really want to please him,
honor him by granting his wish. He is coming here in the hope of making
you and your son realize the horrors of war and admit that injustice was
done to the Pandavas. He is an envoy of peace. If you want to welcome
him, stop your preparations for war and agree to his suggestions.”
Bhishma said, “Whether he is honored or not is immaterial to Krishna.
Even if anyone were to insult him, he would overlook it. He is ﬁghting for
truth—for righting the wrongs done to the Pandavas. If you want to please
him, do as he suggests.”
Duryodhana said, “All of you are always on the side of the Pandavas. I
have a master plan by which the Pandavas will become my slaves. I will
imprison this man and then where will they be?” Everybody was horriﬁed
by this suggestion, but Duryodhana was already scheming with his uncle
how best to achieve this.
Before leaving for his mission of peace, Krishna discussed with the
Pandavas their line of action. Yudhishtira, as usual, championed the cause
of peace and harmony and said, “I would like to live amicably with my
cousins, as I value peace above all things.”
Krishna replied, “Though what you say is true, you have to consider the
opinions of Draupadi and your brothers.”
Bhima said, “We should demand our full share, failing which we should
ﬁght for it. The Kauravas are well aware of my physical strength, Arjuna’s
prowess in archery, and the power of Draupadi’s tears, as well as the fact
that you, O Lord, have pledged to help us. Surely they will realize that they
cannot win the battle.”
Arjuna now spoke up, “Krishna, you know well what is going to happen,
for all things are clear before your vision. All I can say is that if we do not
make good our oaths now, when will we ever be able to do it?”
Nakula continued, “We seem to have lost all sense of pride. I am for war
even though Duryodhana may be persuaded to treat us fairly as promised by
his father.” Sahadeva spoke last, “What the king has said, O Lord, may be
virtuous, but speaking for myself, after having seen the plight of the
princess of Panchala in the open assembly, my wrath can never be appeased
until I see Duryodhana slaughtered. He has committed every dastardly
crime that a man can commit against us. He has tried to kill us by arson,
drowning, murder, and deceit, and still my brother is disposed to be
forgiving. But I can never forget. Only honor can accrue to a Kshatriya if he
dies in a righteous battle. I’d rather court death on the battleﬁeld than lead a
life of idle luxury in any one of the villages that they may bestow on us! But
what is the good of talking? You, O Lord, know everything. If you want to
stop the war you can do it, so do you act as you think ﬁt.”
Krishna laughingly replied, “Tell me how you think I can stop the war.”
Sahadeva replied, “The solution is simple. Kill Arjuna, install Karna on
the throne, bind up Bhima, shave off Draupadi’s tresses, and allow me to tie
you up!”
Krishna was highly amused at this and said, “How do you propose to tie
me up, O Sahadeva? Even my mother Yashoda was not able to do this when
I was only a baby! So how can you do it?”
Sahadeva insisted that he could do it, so the Lord took him to a solitary
spot, took on the form of ten thousand identical Krishnas, and told him to
proceed. Sahadeva remained calm and unrufﬂed by this spectacle, closed
his eyes, meditated on the Lord, and prayed to him, “Let me be able to bind
you, O Lord, with the rope of my eternal love and devotion to you.”
Hardly had he prayed thus when the Lord found himself bound! He said,
“Sahadeva, you have indeed discovered my weak point—that the only thing
that can bind me is the power of love. Now you may release me!”
“Not till you promise to protect us always,” said Sahadeva with a laugh
and released Krishna from his shackles.
Returning to the others, Krishna said in jest that Sahadeva had opted for
peace, which encouraged Yudhishtira to say, “O Lord, then you must go to
the Kaurava court as our ambassador and ask politely for the restoration of
our share of the kingdom. If Duryodhana refuses, ask for a small portion of
our territory. If this, too, is denied, ask for ﬁve cities for the ﬁve of us. Ask
not for just any ﬁve cities. I want Varanavata as a reminder of the attempt to
burn us alive there;  I want Vrikaprashta, where they tried to poison Bhima;
J ayantha, where they cheated at dice and got our kingdom from us;
Indraprastha, which was ours by right;  and the last I leave Duryodhana to
choose. If even this is denied, ask for ﬁve villages. If this is denied, ask for
ﬁve houses. And if he refuses even this, then it shall be war.”
Draupadi had been standing beside Krishna, listening to the arguments of
her husbands and was plunged in grief. With eyes bathed in tears and
unbound hair ﬂowing in luxurious abundance, she addressed him, “O
J anardana! Is there any woman on Earth as unfortunate as I am? I am the
daughter of King Drupada, sister of the mighty Dhrishtadyumna, and your
own devotee. I’m the daughter-in-law of the illustrious Pandu and the queen
of his sons, who resemble ﬁve Indras in splendor. By these ﬁve heroes I
have begotten ﬁve sons, all equally mighty. Yet, O Krishna, I was seized by
the hair, dragged into the open court, and insulted in the very sight of my
illustrious husbands. When the Pandavas sat silently beholding my agony,
what would I have done if you had not come to my rescue? I would have
been stripped in public! Fie on Partha’s bowmanship, ﬁe on Bhima’s
strength, since Duryodhana and Dussasana are still alive! If I deserve any
favor at your hands, if you have any compassion for me, O Krishna, let your
wrath be directed toward the sons of Dhritarashtra.”
With blazing eyes, she took up her curly tresses in her hand, and
approaching him, she continued, “O Pundarikaksha (lotus-eyed one), when
you go to make peace with the Kauravas, remember these tresses of mine,
which were so roughly pulled by the wicked Dussasana. At that time, my
mighty husband Bhima swore that he would tie it up with his hands stained
with the blood of that sinful wretch, and now he sits quietly and agrees to
peace! If my noble husbands refuse to ﬁght, my aged father and his warlike
sons will avenge me in battle. My own sons, with Subhadra’s son,
Abhimanyu, at their head, will ﬁght for my honor. What peace can this
bitter heart of mine know unless I see Dussasana’s arm severed from his
trunk? That arm that pulled my hair so cruelly! That arm that tugged my
garment and tried its best to denude me. Thirteen long years have I spent,
suffering untold hardships in the expectation of better times, holding my
wrath like a smouldering ﬁre beneath the ashes. But now, pierced by my
husbands’ words, that heart of mine is about to break.”
So saying, she began to weep. Krishna tenderly removed her locks from
her face and wiped away her tears with his pitambara (yellow garment) and
comforted her thus: “Soon you will see, O Panchali, the women of the Kuru
race weep, as you do now. Simultaneously with your hair being bound up,
the tresses of the Kaurava women will droop down. They, against whom
your wrath is directed, have already been slain by the power of the Lord as
time. Have you forgotten the promise I made to you in the Kamyaka forest
and again at Upaplavya? At Yudhishtira’s commands, Bhima, Arjuna, and
the twins will accomplish that which has been decreed by the Lord. Their
hour has come, and if they do not listen to my words, the sons of
Dhritarashtra will surely lie on the earth and become food for dogs and
jackals. The mountains of the Himalayas may shift their site, Earth may
split into a thousand fragments, and the ﬁrmament itself with its myriad
stars may fall down, but my words will never be futile. Cease your tears,
therefore, O Panchali! I swear to you that you will soon see your husbands
crowned with every prosperity and your enemies slain on the battleﬁeld.”
Turning to the others, Krishna wound up the discussion. “The world must
know of the greatness of Yudhishtira and no blame should accrue to the fair
name of the Pandavas, and so I shall make one last ﬁnal effort for peace. As
long as Duryodhana does not try to embody his evil thoughts into action,
there is hope for him. But on the other hand, it is not correct for us to sit
idly and tolerate adharma. If he does not agree to Yudhishtira’s most
reasonable request, we shall have to declare war. I shall now undertake to
be your ambassador at the Kaurava court and make a last attempt to settle
the dispute peacefully.”
Conchs blew and the trumpets blared as the Lord set out for Hastinapura
in his chariot studded with gems, driven by his trusted charioteer, Daruka,
and drawn by his favorite horses, Sugriya, Meghapushpa, Saibya, and
Valahaka. The two wheels of the chariot resembled the sun and the moon.
Uddhava and Satyaki accompanied him, and Arjuna went as far as the city
gates. As they entered Hastinapura, the crowds surged around to behold the
living legend that he had become. It is said that not a single soul remained
at home. The old and the blind, the lame, and the sick were all brought out
to see the Lord. Feasting their eyes on his enchanting form, they forgot their
woes and returned home, restored to their normal health. His enrapturing
smile bathed them in a sea of bliss, and they could not bear even to blink in
case they missed a second of that delightful vision. At Dhritarashtra’s
orders, the entire city had been decorated to welcome him, and many
bejeweled arches had been put up. Duryodhana had given orders that the
grandest palace should be put at his disposal. He had wanted to go
personally to the city gates to receive him, but Shakuni had stopped him, as
he said it was demeaning for a mighty monarch like him to receive a mere
cowherd.
With great humility, Krishna saluted the elders, who had come to
welcome him, and politely refused the offer of the palace. He went with his
devotee Vidura to his humble dwelling. It is said that Bhishma’s hospitality
was declined because of his ego of knowledge, Drona’s because of his ego
of being a Brahmin, and Duryodhana’s because of his ego of being a mighty
monarch. Vidura alone had surrendered his ego at the Lord’s feet.
Vidura could hardly believe that his humble abode had been chosen in
preference to the other grand mansions and danced with joy when the Lord
entered his insigniﬁcant abode. “What penance must this humble hut of
mine have done to be graced by your holy feet, which even the great sages
and gods long to have a sight of?” he said.
He shouted to his wife to come out, for the Lord had come to their abode.
She had been taking a bath, but on hearing this she rushed out without
completing her toilette and prostrated before him. She was actually
Krishna’s stepaunt, the daughter of his grandfather, Devakan, by a sudra
(servant) wife. The couple lived very frugally since they did not like to stay
in Duryodhana’s palace and receive his ungracious patronage. But they
were both totally devoted to the Lord and lived a contented life.
There was nothing in the house except some bananas to offer the Lord,
and these she lovingly put on a beautiful leaf and placed before him. In her
excitement, she forgot what she was doing and reverently fed him the skins
and threw the fruits aside! It is said that the Lord patiently ate all the skins
without a word of complaint, for anything that his devotees offered him
with love was accepted by him with relish. Vidura was in the same bemused
state and was watching the Lord’s face with joy. It was only after the whole
bunch was ﬁnished that the devoted couple realized what had been
happening. Afterward, for dinner, it is said that he ate his favorite dish made
from the leaf called bethua (a kind of spinach) that grew in abundance
around their modest house, preferring it to the sumptuous banquet prepared
for him and served on golden platters in the palace of Duryodhana.
After dinner, they discussed the purpose of his visit. Vidura advised him
not to proceed since Duryodhana had already decided on war and was likely
to do him bodily injury if thwarted.
Krishna replied, “The learned consider him a wretch who does not strive
until the end to save a friend from an improper act. It is to serve both parties
that I have come here. If, after listening to my words, the foolish
Duryodhana does not accept them, he will be inviting his own fate. If,
without sacriﬁcing the interests of the Pandavas, I can bring about peace
among the Kurus, I will have served the purpose of dharma, and the
Kauravas themselves will be liberated from the meshes of death. But if, on
the other hand, they seek to injure me, rest assured, O noble one, that all the
kings of this Earth united together are no more a match for me than a herd
of deer before an enraged lion.”
The next morning he sent Vidura with Satyaki and Uddhava ahead of him
to the assembly hall. In the meantime Duryodhana, furious at having his
hospitality spurned, had given strict orders to the assembled people that no
one should stand up to greet the Lord when he came and that he would set
ﬁre to the homes of any who dared to disobey him.
When the Lord walked in with his usual disarming smile, one by one
everyone rose up and prostrated, as if moved by an irresistible impulse. It is
said that Duryodhana’s throne tilted forward and propelled him toward the
Lord’s feet!
Krishna smiled and said, “I’m really moved by your devotion to me, O
Suyodhana (Duryodhana).”
After saluting the elders and greeting everyone else, he was escorted to a
jeweled seat. Unable to contain his chagrin, Duryodhana began, “It was
unkind of you, O Govinda, not to accept my hospitality. I had prepared the
best palace for you and a magniﬁcent banquet.”
Turning his radiant eyes on him, the Lord replied, “One takes food from
the house of another only when the offer is made with love or if one is
starving and has no other recourse. At present, O King, you have not
inspired love in me by any act of yours, nor can I believe that your
invitation has been given with love, neither am I on the verge of starvation.
Without any reason, you have hated your dear and gentle cousins, imbued
with every virtue, from the very moment that you set eyes on them. Know
this, O Duryodhana, they who hate my devotees hate me as well, for all
virtuous people are my very self. Moreover, food that is deﬁled by wicked
thoughts is never acceptable to me. On the other hand, the humblest fare, if
offered with love, I shall joyfully partake, even if it be only a leaf, ﬂower, or
fruit, or even a drop of water.”
He then relented and added, “You are well aware of the code of conduct
by which one cannot become the adversary of one whose hospitality he has
enjoyed. If my mission is successful, I shall be happy to accept your offer
and be your guest.”
Dhritarashtra now courteously greeted Krishna and requested him to
declare the purpose of his visit. A deep silence fell over the audience as the
Lord started to speak in a sonorous voice that ﬁlled the entire hall and
thrilled the audience to immobility.
“I have come hither so that peace may be established between the Kurus
and the Pandavas. The Pandavas have successfully completed their thirteen
years of exile. They have suffered greatly, but they are still prepared to
forget and forgive. The terrible danger that threatens to overwhelm the
entire clan of the Kurus, O King, has its origin in the conduct of your sons.
Therefore, the establishment of peace depends entirely on you. Deprived of
their father in infancy, the Pandavas look upon you as their father. Treat
them, therefore, as your sons and behave toward them as a father.
Remember they are your brother’s children, and it is your duty to protect
their interests. For the sake of virtue, proﬁt, and happiness (dharma, artha,
and kama), O King, make peace with the Pandavas and restrain your sons
from their headstrong conduct!”
Then, turning to Duryodhana, he continued. “I work for the sake of
universal good, O Duryodhana! I desire your good just as much theirs. You
hail from an illustrious race that has always adhered to dharma. You will
attain great fame and prosperity if you restore to the Pandavas that which
was promised to them thirteen years ago.”
The bards now related the story of the ancient sages Nara and Narayana,
the twin avataras of Lord Vishnu who had now taken the incarnations of
Arjuna and Krishna to establish dharma upon Earth. Hearing all this, the
old king trembled with fear for the fate of his sons and told Krishna, “My
son never listens to me or to those of his elders who try to advise him. Do
you advise him and try to make him change his mind.”
So once again with great patience, Krishna turned to Duryodhana and
tried to make him see reason. “O Duryodhana,” he said, “your father as well
as the others desire peace. Why do you not obey them? Why do you rush
headlong into something that will surely destroy your entire race? He who
rejects the words of well-meaning friends and elders, regarding them as
opposed to his interests, and instead accepts the opinions of the wicked will
only be plunged into distress. The Pandavas are willing to accept you as
yuvaraja (heir apparent) and your father as sovereign of the empire, if you
give back to them half the kingdom that is rightfully theirs. Please listen to
the counsel of your friends and bring peace to the land and prosperity to
yourself, or else be forever condemned as the exterminator of your race.”
At this, Bhishma and Drona also urged Duryodhana to follow the Lord’s
advice, but the haughty Duryodhana could hardly contain his anger and
burst out, “The Pandavas gambled away their kingdom voluntarily.
Completion of their exile entitles them only to live as my subjects, not to
any share of the kingdom. Their father, Pandu, was made king only because
my father was blind. I am the son of the elder brother, and since I’m not
blind, the kingdom is rightfully mine. Let them live as your guests in
Dwaraka if they like.”
Shakuni encouraged him by adding, “This is the ﬁrst time that I have
heard of the loser in gambling begging for the return of his lost stakes.”
Krishna sternly replied, “The gambling match was forced on Yudhishtira,
and you played on behalf of Duryodhana, which again was quite
unprecedented. Besides, in front of the entire court, the king gave a solemn
promise that half the kingdom would be returned to them. Why should the
Pandavas live on my hospitality when they are entitled to a kingdom in their
own right? I now ask everyone here to consider carefully the consequences
that will result if the Pandavas are not given back their rightful share. Do
not mistake their love of peace for weakness. If you deny them their due,
they will surely declare war. This in turn will lead to loss of lives, poverty,
famine, and suffering. Parents will lose sons, children will lose fathers, and
women will become widows. There will be an extermination of the very
ﬂower of the Kuru race. Think well, therefore, before you decide.”
Karna interrupted, “What do you have to say about Yudhishtira’s
disgraceful act in gambling away his wife? Such a person does not deserve
a kingdom!”
Krishna replied, “Yudhishtira was incited and taunted into it by Shakuni,
who capitalized on his weakness as well as his evil times. He was promised
the return of his kingdom at the end of thirteen years.”
Turning to Duryodhana he continued, “Duryodhana, you do not realize
the horrors of war and thus you do not appreciate the value of peace. If war
takes place, the cries of the bereaved will rend the air. Everyone will curse
the one who caused it, and you alone will have to bear the brunt of their
curses. The Pandavas are powerful and invincible. They have heroes like
Arjuna, Bhima, Abhimanyu, Gatotkacha, and Iravan on their side. Do not
think that you can defeat them easily with your superior numbers. Think of
your previous defeat at their hands at Kampilya and Matsya. The younger
brothers are itching for a ﬁght, but they will implicitly obey their elder
brother, who is bent on peace. Their request is most reasonable. They have
sent me to negotiate for peace out of their own love for it and not out of
their fear of war.”
Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, and even Asvattama now advised Duryodhana
to opt for peace. Bhishma declared that he did not want to see the end of the
Kuru race during the last years of his life. Drona predicted that a Kaurava
victory in battle would be impossible with Krishna and Arjuna in the
opposite camp. Vidura, too, spoke ﬁrmly and wisely. Karna, Dussasana, and
Shakuni, however, encouraged Duryodhana to defy Krishna, and ﬁnally
Duryodhana said, “O Krishna! Why do you utter such hard words to me
alone? All of you, including the old king, hate me. Yet I do not behold any
fault in myself. I will not bow down to anyone, be it Indra himself, let alone
the sons of Pandu. We are Kshatriyas. If we die in battle, heaven awaits us.
That portion of the kingdom that was formerly given to them by my father
shall never again, O Keshava, be given to them while I live. It was given to
them while I was still too young to make a decision for myself, but they will
never get it again. If they want it, let them ﬁght for it!”
Krishna then said, “In the interests of peace, Yudhishtira is willing to
accept even a portion of land.”
When this was refused by Duryodhana, Krishna asked for ﬁve villages,
and when this too was turned down, he ﬁnally asked, “Will you not at least
give ﬁve houses for the ﬁve brothers?”
Duryodhana thundered, “Not even ﬁve pinpoints of land will I give them!
I’m against the principle of giving, however little it may be!”
Asvattama now appealed to Duryodhana, that he, who had been so
generous in giving Karna a kingdom, could well afford to give ﬁve houses
to his own cousins. He reprimanded Karna for misleading Duryodhana, but
the latter was deaf to all pleas.
Krishna spoke sternly to him once more, “You say you have not
committed any offense against the Pandavas. Conniving with your uncle,
you wrested their possessions from them in an unfair game of dice. Not
content with that, you dragged their wife into the open assembly and
humiliated her. You tried to burn them to death at Varanavata and to kill
them with poison, snakes, and cords. Now you are trying to cheat them of
their rightful heritage, even when they are only asking for a minute portion
of their patrimony. But beware, O Suyodhana! you will have to give it all to
them after you are laid low on the battleﬁeld!”
Furious at these words, Duryodhana marched out of the assembly,
followed by his satellites. Krishna spoke to the assembled Kurus, “Not only
Duryodhana but all of you will be guilty of destroying this race if you do
not stop Duryodhana from pursuing his folly. The time has come to forcibly
seize and bind this wicked prince, as Kamsa, the wicked son of Ugrasena,
was killed by me to save the race of the Yadavas. For the sake of a family,
an individual may be sacriﬁced. For the sake of a village, a family may be
sacriﬁced. For the sake of a country, a village may be sacriﬁced, and for the
sake of his soul, a man may sacriﬁce the whole world. Therefore, bind fast
this Duryodhana and make peace with the Pandavas.”
Hearing these prophetic words, Dhritarashtra immediately called his wife
Gandhari and summoned Duryodhana back in the hope that he might listen
to his mother. But even this proved futile.
At last, Krishna spoke once again, “Since, like a miser, you deny the
Pandavas even ﬁve houses, give me your hand and swear by striking this
pillar that you are ready for war!”
The insolent Duryodhana ﬂung back, “It is below my dignity to give my
hand to you, a mere cowherd, pleading the cause of men who have been
humiliated and disgraced and who have been living like wild animals in the
forest. I really wonder how food went down their throats after they behaved
in such a cowardly fashion thirteen years ago, meekly bearing my taunts as
well as the humiliation to their wife!”
With this parting shot, he arrogantly stalked out of the assembly before it
broke up. Krishna realized that nothing and nobody could deter Duryodhana
from his ill-advised and disastrous action. So he turned to the elders and
said, “All of you have tried your best to drive some sense into
Duryodhana’s head. I have also done my best. Let no blame accrue to the
Pandavas for bringing about this calamity.” So saying, he calmly saluted the
elders and left the court, accompanied by Uddhava and Satyaki.
When righteousness declines and unrighteousnes ex ults, then do I
incarnate myself on E arth. F or the salvation of the good and for the
destruction of the evil and for the fulﬁllment of dharma, I  incarnate
myself age after age.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Haraye Namaha!
2 4
Declaration of  W
ar
Na Khalu Gopika-Nandano Bhavan,
Akhile Dehinam Antaratmadrik,
Vighanasarthito Viswa-Guptaye,
Sakha U deyivan Satvatam Kule.
O eternal companion! Certainly thou art not just the son of Yashoda,
but the immanent witness in all embodied beings. In response to the
prayer of the creator Brahma, thou hast risen among the Yadavas to
protect the world.
No sooner had Krishna left than Duryodhana returned to the assembly and
directed the full blast of his fury on Vidura. He had been nursing a grudge
since childhood against Vidura for having given him advice that was always
against his personal inclination and contrary to the advice given by his
maternal uncle, Shakuni. One was the epitome of virtue and the other of
vice. All the venom that he had been collecting for years was now
discharged in a vituperative ﬂow: “You ungrateful man. You eat my food
and live as a vassal in my kingdom, but you have the ingratitude to play
host to this cowherd and also to feed him with my food after he had rejected
my hospitality. But what else can be expected from the son of a maid, who
always bestows her favors on the highest bidder!”
Vidura was stung to the quick, not merely by the personal insults, which
he had always received from Duryodhana, but because he had uttered them
on a spot that had been sanctiﬁed by the holy footprints of the Lord. As a
result of this, he strung his famous and invincible bow, and aiming an arrow
straight at Duryodhana’s throat, he spoke, “You vile wretch! Can’t you
realize that my hospitality is tantamount to yours? For insulting my mother,
I should sever your head, but I will not do it, since you are in a position of a
son to me, being my brother’s son. I had reluctantly decided to serve you in
the eventuality of a war since it was my duty to do so, but now I have
decided against it. My bow will no longer be at your service during the
war!”
So saying, to the amazement of everyone Vidura broke his bow in two—
the bow that was as famous as Gandiva, Arjuna’s bow—and walked out of
the court. Despite his age, Vidura, armed with his bow, would have been a
formidable adversary, and the Kaurava side felt quite dejected at this turn of
events.
Bhishma remarked grimly, “Whatever doubts I had as to the outcome of
the war are now dispelled. Without Vidura’s bow, the Kauravas are
doomed!”
Duryodhana said in a ﬂattering tone, “I do not depend on this aged man to
win the war. I have you, Drona, Karna, and Asvattama to annihilate the
Pandavas.”
Karna boasted, “Do not depend on these old and feeble men, O
Duryodhana! I shall kill Arjuna and the Pandavas for you.”
Bhishma laughed scornfully and asked, “Have you forgotten your defeat
at Arjuna’s hands, a few days ago in the land of Matsya?”
Duryodhana now began to conjecture how best he could remove Krishna,
for he feared that victory could never be theirs so long as the Lord helped
the Pandavas. Karna suggested burning Vidura’s house while the Lord was
sleeping within. All the others suggested various impractical schemes. The
only Kaurava brother with some sense was Vikarna, the youngest, who as
usual warned them gravely of the unrighteousness of putting a messenger to
death. As usual, he was brushed aside.
Duryodhana said, “This Krishna is advising them to bind me up. Let’s do
the same thing to him before he does it to me. We will tie up this lion of the
Yadavas. Once he’s removed, the Pandavas will be like snakes without
fangs.”
When Dhritarashtra heard this, he was in a panic. “What madness is
this?” he asked Duryodhana. “You are trying to do something that even the
gods could not do. It’s easier to catch the wandering breeze or the sun with
your bare hands!” But Duryodhana was deaf to all advice.
Back in Vidura’s hut, the Lord heard of Vidura’s resolve not to ﬁght and
was delighted, for he was well aware of his prowess with the bow and did
not want him as an adversary. Very soon, Duryodhana sent a messenger,
inviting Krishna to the assembly the next day. Though the Lord was well
aware of the plan to capture him, he was not a whit put out and strode into
the hall escorted by Vidura and Satyaki. As he entered, the Kauravas and
Karna rushed toward him to capture him. Satyaki would have challenged
them with upraised sword, but the Lord restrained him.
Turning to Duryodhana, he said in a voice like thunder, “O Duryodhana!
Thinking me to be a mere mortal, you are trying to capture me, but know
me now for what I am. Behold my cosmic form. Know that in me are the
Pandavas and Vrishnis and Andhakas. Know that in me are all the gods—
Rudra, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Siddhas, and the rishis.”
Saying this, he started to laugh, and as he laughed, from his body that
now resembled a blazing ﬁre, there issued myriads of gods, each like
lightning. On his forehead there appeared Brahma, the creator;  and on his
breast, Rudra, the destroyer;  from his mouth, Agni, the Adityas;  and the
other gods with Indra. From his two arms came Shankarshana (Balarama)
with the ploughshare and Arjuna with the Gandiva, and behind were Bhima,
the sons of Madri, Pradyumna, and all the Yadavas. The form had many
arms, some bearing the conch, the discus, the bow Sarnga, the sword
Nandaka, and all the other accoutrements of Vishnu. The other arms held
many weapons, and from every pore there issued rays as blinding as the
sun. The entire assembly, except Duryodhana, stood up in terror. All except
Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, and the rishis closed their eyes. The latter extolled
him with various hymns, and the elders prayed silently, “O Pundarikaksha!
Forgive us for having associated with these wicked people and for helping
them, for we have eaten their salt and cannot but obey!”
It is said that out of his compassion, the Lord gave even Dhritarashtra,
misguided fool that he was, temporary vision so that he could behold this
mighty form, and Gandhari also removed the bandage round her eyes in
order to have the vision of this unique spectacle.
Dhritarashtra prayed, “Having once seen your Vishvarupa (cosmic form),
I am blessed and do not desire to see anything else any more.”
Once again, the voice thundered, “O Duryodhana, steeped in adharma,
you planned to kill me, an ambassador! I can kill you and all the Kauravas
with a mere look, but I shall not do so, for the Pandavas have sworn to kill
you. Kurukshetra is waiting for its bloodbath, and Yama is ready to enfold
you in his arms!”
The voice died away into silence, and as the stunned assembly members
opened their eyes, they saw the Lord walk out of the hall, arm in arm with
Satyaki and Uddhava. As he left, Dhritarashtra cried out, “O Keshava! Tell
the sons of Pandu that I am innocent of this crime, that my son will not
listen to me!”
As he left, Krishna summoned Asvattama to his side. Duryodhana
followed to see what was happening. Krishna dropped his ring and
Asvattama stooped to pick it up. He then pointed to the dark clouds that
were forming in the sky, and Asvattama gazed upward. Having seen
Asvattama perform these actions, the suspicious Duryodhana inferred that
the latter could not be trusted, as he had just sworn upon Earth and heaven
that he would help the Pandavas. Krishna bade Asvattama farewell and
beckoned to Karna and led him to a secluded spot, where he disclosed to
him the secret of his birth—that he was actually the son of Kunti, by the sun
god, Surya, the brother of the Pandavas! Since he was begotten while she
was still a maiden, she had ﬂoated him down the river, where his foster
parents, Adhiratha the suta (charioteer) and Radha, his wife, had found him
and brought him up. Krishna concluded by urging Karna to accept his
patrimony, recognize the Pandavas as his brothers, and take his rightful
place beside them in the war that was to ensue.
Karna heard all this in silent astonishment and ﬁnally spoke, “No doubt I
have a moral right to be called the son of Pandu, but I was brought up by a
suta, and all my family rites, including my marriage, were conducted
accordingly. For the past so many years, I have enjoyed the status of king of
Anga due to the kindness of Duryodhana. He is depending on me to kill
Arjuna in the coming battle. I can never abandon him now, not even for the
sake of my own life. I know that ours is a lost cause, but my life, though
unsuccessful, has its own rainbow. By the rays of the setting sun, the
rainbow of my life will be seen through my tears. Let me at least have a
hero’s death, though I might not have lived a hero’s life. I am consumed
with repentance for my past behavior. I realize now that the sons of
Dhritarashtra will perish, but one thing do I pray for, O Keshava. Let all the
Kshatriyas who are slain on that most holy ﬁeld of Kurukshetra attain
heaven. One more thing do I beg of you, O Krishna. Keep this discourse a
secret, for I do not want Yudhishtira to know of it.”
Krishna looked at him with great pity and replied, “So be it, O Karna. The
battle will commence on the new moon day, one month hence, and it shall
be as you wish. All the heroes who fall in battle will attain heaven.”
Karna bowed to the Lord and said, “If we come out of this great battle
alive, may we meet here again? If not, O J anardana, we shall surely meet in
heaven!” Then, looking into the Lord’s compassionate eyes, he added sadly,
“Perhaps it is only there that we shall meet.”
Krishna clasped him to his bosom, for he was well aware of the worth of
this mighty hero who had had all the cards stacked against him from the
time of his birth. Sadly, Karna returned to the city, and Krishna went to the
house of Kunti, which adjoined Vidura’s. She was delighted to see him.
With tears streaming from her eyes, she embraced him and said, “Seeing
you has made me as happy as seeing my own sons. But, O Lord, I’m fearful
of the future. Is there to be no peaceful solution? Has your coming been in
vain?”
Krishna replied, “Every attempt at peace has been thwarted by
Duryodhana. So now we have to plan in order to ensure a Pandava victory.
A lot depends on you. Do you have any news of the whereabouts of your
ﬁrstborn, whom you conceived before marriage and abandoned in fear and
shame?”
Kunti was aghast at having her closely guarded secret brought into the
open like this and said, “How did you come to know of this? Ever since that
day, I have known no peace. I have no idea where he might be. He might
have been drowned in the river for all I know.”
Krishna replied, “There is nothing I do not know. That long lost son of
yours is none other than Karna, the mighty hero on the Kaurava side and
Duryodhana’s bosom companion. Now think carefully. Would you prefer to
have Karna alive or the other ﬁve? If Karna kills Arjuna as he has sworn to
do, the others will kill themselves, for they are like a ﬁve-headed serpent
that will perish if one of its hoods is cut off.”
Kunti was extremely agitated and said, “I shall reveal myself to Karna
and persuade him to join his brothers. Surely he will not refuse.”
“That is a very good idea,” said the Lord, “but if Karna rejects your plea,
as I think he will, you should ask for two boons from him. One is that he
will not kill any of your sons except Arjuna in battle and the second is not
to use his Nagastra (cobra missile) more than once.”
Kunti’s heart melted for the sake of her newfound son, and she asked
fearfully, “Won’t Karna’s life be jeopardized if he gives these boons?”
“Of course it will,” said Krishna, “but it is too much to ask for the lives of
all your six sons as well as to erase adharma from the world! Karna’s
inborn nobility has been defaced by association with the wicked. If he takes
this opportunity to join his noble brothers, well and good;  otherwise, you
will have to accept the inevitable.”
“You are God incarnate. How can I argue with you?” she asked sadly.
“You have incarnated to destroy adharma. Destruction is only a sport for
you, just as creation is a game. I have never been a mother to Karna, and
now I have to be the instrument for his destruction!”
Krishna left her and summoned Indra, the king of the gods, who was also
Arjuna’s father, and told him, “Your son’s life is in great danger. Karna has
sworn to kill him in the forthcoming battle. Proceed immediately to Karna,
therefore, disguised as a mendicant and beg for his kavacha and kundala
(armor and earrings), with which he was born and which make him
invincible. Karna will never refuse to give anything to anybody, for he is
the most generous man alive.”
One marvels at how the Lord made every effort to bring out the best
points in his devotees so that the world would ever extol them, even at the
cost of bringing disrepute to himself. In the ensuing war he was to do this
many times, stooping to seemingly unrighteous acts to highlight the virtues
of devotees like Bhishma, Drona, and Yudhishtira.
Indra lost no time in proceeding to Karna’s palace. It was the latter’s
practice to give anything to anyone before midday. After this, he would
worship Surya, the sun god, for whom he had a decided partiality, even
though he was ignorant of his parentage. Indra, disguised as a mendicant,
arrived a little late but was still received most cordially, for Karna could
never resist a beggar. Karna asked him what he wanted, and the old man
promptly asked for his kavacha and kundala. Karna was taken aback at this
strange request from an old mendicant, yet he unhesitatingly went inside
and proceeded to tear off the armor and earrings with which he had been
born. The sun god’s voice now proclaimed to him that the old Brahmin was
none other than Indra, the father of Arjuna, and that he should give him
anything other than his kavacha and kundala. To his eternal glory, Karna,
the most charitable man alive, shrugged off this advice from his father, tore
off his armor and earrings, and returned to the supplicant. He was smeared
all over with blood, yet spoke gently, “I’m indeed fortunate to be able to
give something to one who is known for his generosity (one of Indra’s
names is Parjanya, the giver of rain and thus of life). I am proud that in
receiving from me, your hands are at a lower level than mine.”
Thus did the Lord establish Karna as superior even to Indra in the giving
of gifts! Indra, realizing that his identity had been revealed, said in shame,
“The world will no longer say, ‘ like Parjanya in giving,’ but ‘ like Karna in
giving.’ Now I must give you something in return. What would you like?”
Karna replied, “My Lord, my gift will lose its grace and merit if I ask for
something in return, but on the other hand, I do not want your name to fall
into disrepute. The world may blame you for having wrested my most
precious possessions from me without having given anything in return, so,
to safeguard your name, I will ask for something. I would like to have your
Shakti weapon, if it pleases you.”
Indra was amazed at the magnanimity of this great soul and gladly gave
him the weapon and praised him. “Know, O Karna, that your name will live
forever as the most muniﬁcent man alive. Take my Shakti weapon. It will
enable you to kill one of the most formidable heroes on the Pandava side.”
So saying, he vanished from sight.
The next day Kunti came to see her ﬁrstborn. She went to the river where
Karna was worshipping the midday sun. Surprised at seeing her, he escorted
her most respectfully to his palace. Kunti gazed lovingly at him, noting for
the ﬁrst time his resemblance to her other sons, and spoke tenderly to him,
“Your mother must indeed be proud of you.”
Karna said bitterly, “Do not mention that word to me. My mother was a
heartless woman who abandoned me as a baby.”
“Do not judge her harshly. There were many reasons why she had to act
as she did. Didn’t Krishna tell you?” she asked softly.
“Yes,” said Karna. “He told me that I am actually a Pandava, but I want to
verify that you are indeed my mother. Many women have come and claimed
this title. The sun god has given me a golden mantle that will burn anyone
who touches it who is not my mother. Will you allow me to put it on you?”
Kunti gladly agreed. He placed the mantle on her, and she remained
unscathed. Karna’s eyes ﬁlled with tears, and he fell at her feet. “So it’s true
that I am really your son and the brother of the righteous Pandavas. I am
truly blessed. For the moment, let me forget everything and remember only
that I have found my mother!” So saying, he laid his head on her lap. Kunti
caressed him, and for a few blissful moments, both of them forgot the
catastrophe that was threatening them. At last Kunti broke the silence.
“Now that you know who you are, it is only right that you should join your
brothers and take your rightful place as their leader. They will gladly accept
you, and Yudhishtira will give you the position of yuvaraja most happily,
for he is the soul of righteousness.”
Karna’s face clouded, and he said sadly, “That never can be, O Mother! I
can never abandon Duryodhana, who has been my friend, benefactor, and
only well-wisher for so many years!”
J ust then he heard a voice coming from the solar orb advising him to
follow his mother’s advice, but even then Karna’s heart did not waver. With
bitterness, he said, “You abandoned me as a baby. No enemy could have
done more. And now you have come, not for my sake but for the sake of
your other sons, who might be slain by me! But I would be a poor friend
indeed if I deserted Duryodhana now, at this critical juncture. At a time
when I was forlorn and helpless, he gave me not only friendship but even a
kingdom and a high status and aided me in my desire to marry the princess
of my choice. Tell me truly, Mother, am I to abandon such a man just
because I have found a set of brothers who hate and despise him? To the
world, he may be wicked, but to me, he is a great soul!”
“Duryodhana is indeed fortunate to have you for a friend, my child,”
Kunti said. “No doubt I deserve all that you think of me, and your loyalty to
him makes me proud of you. Maybe this was why Krishna sent me to you,
so that I would discover your greatness. The law of karma is inexorable.
Each one must reap what he sows. Fight for Duryodhana, if you must, but
promise me two things.”
“I’m truly blessed to be able to give boons to a mother I have hardly
met,” said Karna, “but please do not hesitate to ask for whatever you may
want from me, and I will surely not hesitate to give it to you.”
Somewhat apprehensively, Kunti said, “Promise me that you will not kill
your brothers in battle.”
Karna spoke sadly, “You have asked for the one thing that I cannot give,
for you must know that I have promised to kill Arjuna in battle, or be killed
by him. But one thing I can promise you: I will not slay any of the others. I
cannot let Duryodhana down, so ﬁght I must with Arjuna until one of us is
slain. But even then, O Mother, be satisﬁed that the number of your sons
will remain the same. Now what is the other boon you wish to ask?”
“Promise me that you will not use the Nagastra weapon more than once,”
she said with trepidation. She knew that she was being grossly unfair to him
as she had been from his birth, yet she was helpless to avert the decrees of
fate, and she was bound to make a last desperate effort to save her ﬁve sons,
even at the cost of the sixth!
Karna laughed bitterly, “O Mother, my suspicions were correct. It is only
your love for your other sons that has prompted you to approach me today
and reveal your identity! But why are you worried? The Lord himself is
Arjuna’s charioteer, and it is ordained that victory will follow in the wake of
Krishna. My efforts will come to naught even if I refuse your request. It is
obvious, therefore, that he himself must have prompted you to request this
boon to test my adherence to dharma! Therefore, I grant you the boon, O
Mother. In any case, a heroic archer will not use an arrow more than once.
But now that I have given you two boons, don’t you think it proper that I
should request something from you?”
Kunti gladly consented, for her heart was heavy with sorrow at the
thought of her eldest son’s fate.
Karna said, “Promise me that you will not reveal my identity to your
other sons for the time being. If Yudhishtira knows who I am, he will offer
me the kingdom, and I, in turn, will give it to Duryodhana. It is best to keep
silent on this matter. The second request is that if I am killed by Arjuna, you
shall come to the battleﬁeld, take my body in your lap, and mourn over me,
thus announcing my identity to the whole world.”
Kunti burst into tears as she granted him the two boons. Lovingly, she
embraced him and blessed him. Fondly, she gazed at him, unable to tear her
gaze away from his noble mien, for she felt that she would never see him
alive again.
After she had left him, Karna sat and mused for a long time over the
strange sequence of events that had made him what he was. Imbued as he
was with all noble qualities, evil association alone had brought out the
worst in him. Generous to a fault, there were many incidents in his life that
proved his muniﬁcence. For Duryodhana, he was prepared to give the
greatest gift of all, the gift of his life. Had he been given the opportunities
and upbringing of the other Pandavas, there is no doubt that he might have
exceeded Yudhishtira in his virtues. The encounters with Indra and Kunti,
instigated by the Lord, were calculated to bring out his best points. Another
incident prompted by the Lord that brought out his muniﬁcence and
generosity is worth mentioning here.
Soon after the Rajasuya, the Lord thought that Yudhishtira was getting a
little too proud of his own generosity. He took him and Karna to the
Himalayas, converted two hills into pure gold, gave one to each of them,
and told them to use it to help people. Both of them were extremely pleased,
since they were both generous souls. Yudhishtira engaged some workmen to
dig the hill and distributed the gold daily to those who came for help. This
went on for some months until the whole hill was exhausted. Karna, in the
meantime, issued a proclamation in the city that anyone desiring to have
some gold could go and dig for himself from the hill. Needless to say, the
whole hill was cleared within ten days. This was a salutary lesson for
Yudhishtira. He realized that if the word muniﬁcent could be applied to
anyone, it could only be to Karna and that his own liberality was not a patch
on the other’s! Thus, in many ways, did the Lord take pains to see that the
world realized Karna’s greatness.
Krishna then returned to Upaplavya, where the Pandavas were staying,
and gave Yudhishtira a precise account of the happenings at the Kuru
Assembly. He ended by saying, “They will not, O son of Pandu, give you
even a pinpoint of land, much less the kingdom, without a battle. With
death awaiting them, they will become the cause of a universal
destruction!”
When Yudhishtira heard of the attempt on the Lord’s life, he was furious.
“Did he dare to do that? Then there is no hope for him. I will never forgive
him for this. We will ﬁght.” Bhima was thrilled when he heard this. He
threw his mace into the air, caught it, and shouted in glee, “War! War! Let
us ﬁght. The earth is thirsting for the blood of these sinners.” Yudhishtira
ordered his brothers to muster their army for the coming war. Needless to
say, the brothers, as well as Draupadi, were delighted at the turn of events,
for the injustice they had suffered at the hands of the Kauravas from
childhood had fostered a bitterness in their souls that could never be
appeased except in battle.
Krishna then gave Kunti’s message to her sons. She had been a constant
witness to the humiliations they had had to suffer at Duryodhana’s hands
from childhood, and she realized that war was inevitable. She had told
Krishna before he left, “Remind my son Yudhishtira that the time has now
come for my sons to ﬁght for the cause of dharma on the battleﬁeld. Tell
him the story of the weak-minded prince, Sayana, who had to be goaded to
ﬁght a righteous war by his mother, even though she knew that he would
perish in the battle.”
This was a ﬁtting message for a noble Kshatriya lady to give her sons, and
Yudhishtira bowed to the will of fate. The seven akshauhinis and many
great warriors assembled in the Pandava camp, and Yudhishtira picked out
the warriors who were to lead the akshauhinis. They were Drupada, Virata,
Drishtadyumna, Shikhandin, Satyaki, Chekitana, and Bhima. He then asked
his brothers to choose a general from among these to be in overall charge of
the army. Sahadeva recommended Virata, Nakula suggested Drupada, while
Arjuna recommended his brother-in-law Drishtadyumna, and Bhima,
Shikhandin.
Then, turning to Lord Krishna, Yudhishtira said, “The strength and
weakness of everything in the universe as well as the intentions of everyone
are well known to you, O Krishna! Old or young, skilled or unskilled, let
him be the leader of my forces who is indicated by you, for you are at the
root of our success or failure. In you are invested our lives, our kingdom,
our prosperity and adversity, our happiness and misery. You are indeed the
ordainer and creator. In you is established the fruition of our desires. Do
you, therefore, name the leader of our host? Having selected him and
worshipped our weapons, we will, under your orders, march to the ﬁeld of
battle.”
Krishna’s opinion was that youth should take precedence over experience.
Unhesitatingly, he supported Arjuna and chose Drishtadyumna as
commander of the Pandava forces.
The battleﬁeld of the Kurus was known as Kurukshetra and was situated
eighty miles north of Indraprastha. The mythical river Saraswati was
supposed to have gone underground there. King Kuru, the progenitor of the
dynasty, had himself plowed the land during the course of a holy rite that
had been conducted there and had prayed that all those who died on the
ﬁeld would attain heaven. In a previous age, Parasurama, the sixth
incarnation of Vishnu, had slaughtered twenty-one generations of evil
Kshatriya rulers on that ﬁeld and made the holy lake of Syamantapanchaka
red with their blood. In the morning, the Pandava host started to move
toward this ﬁeld. They pitched their camp beside the river Hiranavathi. The
Lord himself attended to the most minor details of the stationing of the
troops.
At the same time, the Kaurava army also reached the ﬁeld. Seeing this,
Yudhishtira was once again struck with remorse and turned to Krishna for
comfort. The latter reminded him of what had happened in the Kuru
Assembly and how even Bhishma, Drona, and Dhritarashtra had acquiesced
in Duryodhana’s wickedness by keeping silent. Vidura alone had
remonstrated, and he had been so badly insulted by Duryodhana that he had
broken his famous bow, sworn not to participate in the war, and was already
on his way to various pilgrimage spots. With a sigh, Yudhishtira realized
that he was helpless against the decrees of fate.
In the Kaurava camp, it was decided that age and experience should take
precedence over youth in the choice of a general. Moreover, Duryodhana
must have realized that the elders were helping him only because they did
not want to betray their salt and not because they believed in his cause. The
least he could do for them was to give them a place of importance, so he
requested Bhishma to take charge of the army. Now it was Bhishma’s turn
to grade the warriors in their respective ranks, according to their abilities.
Adhirathas formed the ﬁrst category. They were the bravest and most
skilled, capable of ﬁghting alone. Then came the Maharathas, Samarathas,
and Artharathas, graded according to the number of soldiers who were
deputized to help them. Karna received an unpleasant shock when he was
degraded to the lowest category. Bhishma’s explanation was that without
his armor and earrings, he was no longer invulnerable and would need to be
protected by many soldiers. Duryodhana had to pacify the angry Karna,
who swore not to ﬁght as long as Bhishma was in command. “As long as
Ganga’s son is in command, O King, I shall never ﬁght, but after he falls, I
shall ﬁght and kill the wielder of the Gandiva for you, as I promised.” His
pride had been so badly bruised that not even Duryodhana could make him
waver from this strange decision.
Next came the macabre ceremony of offering a human sacriﬁce to the
goddess Kali to ensure a victory. This practice was prevalent at that time,
though the Pandavas did not seem to have resorted to such atrocities. The
person to be offered had to be a perfect specimen of manhood and not just
any senseless clod, picked up at random.
When approached by Duryodhana, Bhishma said, “The person to be
sacriﬁced must have all the thirty-two physical attributes of a perfect human
being. Only two people qualify for this, and both of them are in the Pandava
camp. They are Lord Krishna and Iravan, the son of Arjuna. If you can
persuade Iravan to sacriﬁce himself for your sake, then you will have
accomplished two purposes, for he is a warrior beyond compare and can
defeat the Kaurava forces single-handed, in one day. As for the choice of an
auspicious date for the sacriﬁce, there is no better astrologer than Sahadeva.
Therefore, go and ask these things of him and Iravan. I ﬁrmly believe that
though they are most unreasonable requests on your part, yet devoted to
righteousness as they are, they will accede.”
Duryodhana is said to have gone to the Pandava camp in the middle of the
night, so as to escape the notice of anyone, in order to solicit Iravan and
Sahadeva for their help. Sahadeva welcomed him, and Duryodhana spoke
apprehensively, for even though he was steeped in selﬁshness, he felt rather
uncertain about Sahadeva’s reaction. “I have come to you, O Sahadeva, for
you have the reputation of being an expert in astrology. I want you to give
me an auspicious date for offering a human sacriﬁce to the goddess Kali in
order to ensure our victory.”
“Certainly,” Sahadeva replied unhesitatingly, and after consulting the
almanac he said, “Whoever offers a human sacriﬁce on the new moon day
(arnavasya) in the month of Margashirsha (November/  December) will be
victorious.”
They were already in the month of December, and the new moon was the
day after. This incident throws a great light on the character of the
Pandavas. Duryodhana’s belief in Sahadeva implicitly shows that not even
he had any doubts about their inherent nobility. J ubilant at the success of his
mission, Duryodhana hurried off to Iravan’s tent without wasting time in
thanking Sahadeva adequately. The request to Iravan was put with great
trepidation, as can be imagined, for it was a request to sacriﬁce his own life
to promote the cause of his enemies. But once again, Bhishma’s words
proved true, for Iravan showed himself a true son of the Pandavas and
promised to present himself at the appointed time at the Kali temple on the
night of the new moon. Certain that the war was already won, Duryodhana
hurried back, elated with his success.
The happenings of the night were duly reported to Krishna the next
morning. The Lord is the knower of all things, yet he pretended to be
surprised and annoyed at the behavior of the two. This again was to bring
out the greatness of Yudhishtira’s character.
Yudhishtira embraced Sahadeva and Iravan in joy and said, “I am indeed
proud of you both for not swerving from dharma, even though your act may
bring about our destruction.” Then, turning to Krishna, he very simply and
humbly told him, “O Lord, we are in your hands. Do with us as you will.”
At ﬁrst Krishna suggested that he himself would take the place of Iravan,
as he had the necessary qualities, but all of them were adamant that this
should not be.
After a moment, he said, “Tomorrow is amavasya, the night of the new
moon, when the sacriﬁce is to be offered. Get 1,200 Brahmins to worship
the sun and the moon today and persuade 300 sages to observe the rites
pertaining to the amavasya today, instead of tomorrow.”
Without asking any questions, the Pandavas obeyed. It is said that Surya
(the sun god) and Chandra (the moon god), noting these blunders being
committed in their names, came down to complain to the Lord. Krishna
asked them smilingly, “Do you know when amavasya occurs?”
They were surprised at this childish question and answered, “But of
course. It is the day of the new moon, when the sun and moon come
together and thus the moon cannot be seen at all.”
Krishna laughed and said, “Now, since both of you have come here
together, today has to be amavasya and not tomorrow! Now you may both
return to your respective abodes.”
Both of them were nonplussed at this neat deﬁnition and departed. Iravan
said to Krishna, “I have promised Duryodhana to present myself at the Kali
temple on the night of the new moon, so I should go today. It is unlikely
that he will appear today, so grant me permission to sacriﬁce myself on this
auspicious night for the sake of the Pandavas. I shall cut my ﬂesh piece by
piece and offer it to the goddess to ensure a Pandava victory, but even then,
O Lord, please grant me the boon that I shall not die there but on the
battleﬁeld.”
Krishna smiled and granted him the boon. That night, Iravan adorned
himself in the accepted manner, went to the Kali temple, and offered his
ﬂesh to the goddess. Yet, due to the Lord’s blessings, he found himself still
alive, though hardly anything more than a walking skeleton, and returned to
ﬁght for his father.
All these episodes before and during the war constitute the play of the
Lord, by which he tested his devotees again and again to prove to the world
how great was their adherence to dharma. Since they passed with ﬂying
colors, the Lord himself stepped in to prove the Vedic dictum, Dharmo
rakshati rakshitaha (Dharma will protect him who upholds it).
When he went to the Kali temple the next day and discovered his mistake,
Duryodhana was furious. He suddenly remembered the words of his
mother, Gandhari, when he had gone to her for her blessings before leaving
for Kurukshetra. She had told him quite simply, “Where there is dharma,
there will be victory!”
Bitterly, he thought how far he had deviated from dharma, since he had
considered sacriﬁcing Arjuna’s son in order to bring victory to himself. He
gave vent to his venom by sending Shakuni’s son Uluka to the Pandava
camp in order to taunt them.
Uluka delivered the insulting message, “The time has come, O cousins, to
make good your oaths. Shamelessly you stood by and watched your wife
being insulted and then meekly went away and lived like animals in the
forest. Is there no manliness in you? Yudhishtira hides his cowardice under
the cloak of righteousness. But beware, Bhima will soon be slaughtered by
me, Arjuna by Karna, and as for the two little darlings, they are not even ﬁt
to wield arms! Your wife Draupadi is a common woman, and the cowherd
Krishna’s sorcery and magic will be of no avail in the ﬁeld of battle.”
Arjuna said, “Only eunuchs ﬁght with words. When the time comes, my
Gandiva shall give a ﬁtting answer to your master!”
Yudhishtira replied, “Remind Duryodhana that I made every effort to
obtain my just dues through peaceful means, not out of fear, but because I
love peace.” Bhima roared that he would break Duryodhana’s thighs and
drink Dussasana’s blood, as he had sworn to do. Nakula swore to kill Uluka
himself, and Sahadeva, his father, Shakuni.
Krishna alone laughed at hearing these insults and told the gambler’s son
(Uluka) to tell his cousins that the cowherd’s chariot would move like
lightning through the ranks of the Kauravas, leaving death and destruction
in its wake.
After Uluka’s departure, Yudhishtira was sunk in gloom, thinking of the
senseless sacriﬁce of lives that would ensue in the coming battle. Krishna,
Bhima, and Arjuna consoled him. “You have done your best, O Brother!”
they said, “but fate is inevitable, and it is our unpleasant duty as Kshatriyas
to ﬁght for the cause of dharma.”
Next came Balarama, accompanied by Akrura, and told Yudhishtira,
“This ﬁerce and terrible slaughter seems inevitable. It is without doubt a
decree of fate. But fear not, O King! Your victory is certain, for it is
Krishna’s wish. My affection for Duryodhana, however, is equal to that for
Bhima, so I shall not participate in the war but shall go on a pilgrimage so
that I need not be a witness to the slaughter.”
The 
commanders-in-chief 
of 
the 
two 
armies, 
Bhishma 
and
Drishtadyumna, now met and decided on the rules of the battle. It was to be
a dharma yuddha, or a war of righteousness. The battle was to take place
only from sunrise to sunset, after which the opposing soldiers were free to
mingle with each other if they so wished. No one was to attack an enemy
from the rear. Anyone who surrendered or ﬂed or played the coward should
be spared. Battles should take place only between equals. For instance,
those in chariots should only ﬁght with their counterparts. Verbal jousts
should not be violated with weapons. The battle would consist of
indiscriminate ﬁghting between foot soldiers or duels between equals. A
single person should not be attacked by many. These and many other such
rules were decided upon by the righteous commanders, but needless to say,
during the course of the war, most of these rules were thrown overboard.
“ Drive my chariot, O Krishna, and place it between the two armies
—
that I  may see those warriors who stand there eager for battle,
with whom I  must ﬁght.”
When Krishna heard the words of Arjuna, he drove Arjuna’s
glorious chariot and placed it between the two armies.
F acing Bhishma, Drona, and other royal rulers, Krishna said, “ See,
Arjuna, the armies of the Kurus gathered here on this battleﬁeld.”
Then Arjuna saw in both armies fathers, grandfathers, sons,
grandsons, 
fathers-in-law, 
uncles, 
preceptors, 
brothers,
companions, and friends.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Jagatgurave Namaha!
2 5
Srimad Bhagavad Gita
Aum Parthaya prathibodhitam Bhagavatham Narayanena swayam,
Vyasena grathitham puranamuninam madhye Mahabharatam,
Advaitamritavarshinim bhagavatim ashtadasadhyayinim,
Amba twam anusanthatami Bhagavad Gite bhavadweshinim.
Aum, O Mother Bhagavad Gita, consisting of eighteen chapters and
showering the immortal message of nonduality, which is the
destroyer of rebirth, composed within the Mahabharata by the
ancient sage Vyasa, by which Arjuna was illumined by Lord
Narayana himself. On thee, O Mother, I meditate.
Wars are ﬁrst fought in the minds of men before they are fought in actuality.
The bitterness and jealousy that had been festering in the minds of the
cousins for so many years culminated in the mighty Mahabharata war,
which was fought in eighteen days.
The ten days following the new moon, on which the human sacriﬁce was
to have been made, were spent in Ayudha Puja, or the ceremonial worship
of the weapons by both sides. Winter rains had swept the ﬁeld. Kurukshetra
was wet and slushy when the great war commenced on the eleventh day of
the bright fortnight in the month of Margashirsha when the planet Krittika
was in ascendancy. It was on the auspicious day known as Vaikuntha
Ekadasi. Some modern calculators place the war on Friday, November 22,
3067 BCE. The great message of Lord Krishna to his friend Arjuna, known
as the Srimad Bhagavad Gita, was given on the morning of the ﬁrst day of
the battle.
The mighty epic of the Mahabharata reached its climax during the
eighteen days of the battle. The Lord’s role in this war is similar to the role
he plays in our lives as the inner guide and counselor, ever ready and
willing to lead the chariot of our lives through the turbulent battleﬁeld of
Kurukshetra into the heaven of dharmakshetra, or divine life, if we, like
Arjuna, give over the reins of our chariot into his capable hands and have
faith and trust in him. Though the Kauravas had numerical superiority, the
Pandavas won, since the Lord himself was Partha’s sarathi (Arjuna’s
charioteer). Even this humble role he was willing to take for the sake of his
devotee and friend who had surrendered his all to him. This is one of the
most sublime and elevating episodes in his enthralling life, his uttama lila,
or supreme game. At the commencement of the battle he boosted up
Arjuna’s ﬂagging spirits with the glorious teaching of the Bhagavad Gita
and the revelation of his cosmic form. In the following days, it was only due
to his advice and skillful maneuvering of the chariot that the Pandavas won
against insuperable odds. So also, if we have God with us there, is no
adversity we cannot overcome.
The night before the war, Yudhishtira could not sleep. He told Krishna,
“My Lord, I cannot bear the idea of ﬁghting with our grandfather and the
gurus. I hate the very idea of this war. How are we to kill these elders whom
we have been worshipping for all these years?”
Krishna said, “Yudhishtira, you have been born a Kshatriya. So do your
duty as one. Look at your grandfather. He has willingly undertaken to
command the Kaurava army. Kripa, Drona, Asvattama, all of them could
have refused to ﬁght as Vidura did, but all of them agreed to help
Duryodhana. So why are you ﬂinching from doing your part?”
Krishna continued, “What sin is there, O Brother, in killing those who
have sworn to kill us? These elders, though knowing everything about us,
have opted to side with Duryodhana, so why are you so frightened to ﬁght
them? We have to ﬁght. There is no going back. The river, having once left
its mountain fastness, is bound to go rushing down to meet the sea. The
river of battle has already started on its course. None can stop it, except the
ocean of death!”
Both armies were now assembled on the plain of Kurukshetra by the side
of the river Hiranavathi. The Pandavas were on the western side near the
holy lake and the Kauravas on the eastern. The arena of the battle extended
over ﬁfty-eight square kilometers of territory. The code of warfare had
already been decided upon, but as will be seen, one by one, in the days that
followed every rule was thrown overboard. War corrupts and makes man
susceptible to every type of adharma. In the end, even the Pandavas
succumbed.
On the morning of the commencement of the battle, the sage Vyasa went
to the blind king Dhritarashtra at Hastinapura. Dhritarashtra was very
anxious to have some idea of the happenings on the battleﬁeld, and so the
sage endowed the king’s prime minister, Sanjaya, with clairvoyance to
enable him to give a ﬁrsthand report of the battle to the king. He told him
that during the day he would be able to follow all the events that were
taking place on the battleﬁeld as if he were present on the spot, and in the
evening he could narrate the entire sequence of events to the blind king. So
the whole story of the battle as reported in the Mahabharata is the narration
of Sanjaya.
The Song of the Lord, known as the Bhagavad Gita, which contains the
crux of his teaching to humankind, is placed at the very outset of the great
war and comes in the middle portion of the epic, thus denoting its supreme
importance in the eyes of its author, Vyasa. In the opening chapter of the
Bhagavad Gita, Sanjaya gives a swift portrait to the blind king of the
various generals stationed on either side and of the activities preparatory to
battle. Flags were ﬂying, drums were booming, conchs and trumpets were
blaring, men were eager and restive, as were the horses. The two armies had
drawn up in battle formation. The stage was set for the ﬁnal scene in the
mighty drama of their lives, the grand climax that the cousins had been
expecting and preparing for during the major portion of their lives.
Ten akshauhinis of the Kauravas were arranged in a formidable phalanx.
The eleventh was directly under Bhishma, who was right in front. His
horses were white, his chariot was silver, and his armor gleamed like silver
in the morning son. His banner was a golden palm with ﬁve stars. His noble
mien gave great conﬁdence to the Kaurava troops. Duryodhana was in the
middle. His banner of a serpent embroidered on a golden cloth was
ﬂuttering gaily in the breeze.
Suddenly, Sanjaya’s narrative was arrested by the appearance of the main
characters: Arjuna, tall and handsome, standing in the chariot holding the
mighty bow Gandiva, and Krishna, seated in front holding the reins in his
steady hands, controlling the four milk-white steeds that were straining at
the bit and eager to charge into battle. The Lord’s face was beautiful to
behold. His lotus eyes were ﬁlled with compassion as he gazed at the ﬂower
of Aryan manhood that had assembled in the battleﬁeld. Bhishma, Drona,
and Kripa mentally saluted the noble pair, for they knew that they were
beholding the avataras of Nara and Narayana. Hanuman had taken his place
on Arjuna’s terrible ape banner, striking terror into the hearts of the soldiers
by his ﬁerce gesticulations.
Arjuna told Krishna to take the chariot to the center of the ﬁeld between
the opposing armies so that he could observe both sides and get an overall
picture of the situation before the battle commenced. Obedient to his role as
a charioteer, Krishna, the Lord of all the worlds, obeyed the command of
his friend Arjuna and drove the chariot to this no-man’s land between the
opposing armies. Arjuna, the mighty hero of the age, surveyed the opposing
army and saw not his enemies but his cousins, friends, relations, teachers,
nephews, and grandsire. A tremendous psychological revulsion welled up in
him. The full impact of the terrible destruction that was to take place hit
him like a blow in the solar plexus. His whole body trembled with the
shock, his mind reeled, his mighty bow, the Gandiva, fell from his nerveless
grasp, and he collapsed in a heap on the ﬂoor of the chariot. Bringing forth
many ethical and moral arguments for avoiding such a conﬂict, this mighty
bowman told the Lord that he would not ﬁght. To him, who was thus in
such a pitiable condition, Lord Krishna, his friend, philosopher, and God,
imparted this most marvellous spiritual instruction, the highest spiritual
instruction that can be given to humanity, known as the Srimad Bhagavad
Gita, or “The Song of God.” The Lord chose to sing his song in the middle
of a battleﬁeld with the background of drums and conchs and not in the
silence of the forest, the sanctity of a temple, or the peace of an ashrama.
What was his purpose in choosing such a location? Arjuna and he had been
very close. They had often been alone together when the Lord could have
advised him, but he had not chosen to do so. Why was this? Why did he
pick this peculiar location?
The philosophy of the Gita is not for the weak or cowardly person who is
afraid to face life as it is. It is for the heroic one, who is ready to face the
challenges of life in the effort to evolve into godliness. The Bhagavad Gita
does not teach an ethical sentimentalism that loves to look on nature as
good and beautiful and refuses to face her grim and frightening mask.
Unless we have the courage to face existence as it is, we will never be able
to arrive at a solution to its conﬂicting demands. Harmony has to be
achieved in and through the disharmony that we cannot deny. War and
destruction seem to be the principle not only of our material lives but of our
mental lives as well. Life is a battleﬁeld of good and evil forces. We are
placed in the center of this ﬁeld, now swayed by the good, now drawn by
the evil. As in the Mahabharata war, the latter appears to be far stronger
than the former.
Like Arjuna, we stand in this no-man’s land between the opposing forces.
Every moment we are faced with decisions and controversies. Perplexed
and torn between the warring forces within ourselves, we know not which
way to turn. The famous pictorial representation of the Bhagavad Gita, in
which Arjuna is seated in the chariot with Lord Krishna holding the reins of
the four white prancing horses, is an allegory of our conﬂicted life. The
chariot represents the body, with Arjuna the jivatma, or the embodied soul,
seated within. Lord Krishna is the Paramatma, or the cosmic soul, who has
ever been his boon companion but whom he has not recognized as the
Supreme. The four horses represent the four aspects of the mind: manas,
buddhi, ahamkara, and chitta (mind, intellect, ego, and collective
consciousness). This mental equipment drives us like uncontrollable horses,
hither and thither, in its mad quest for enjoyment. Arjuna, the embodied
soul, was faced with a violent crisis that seemed quite incompatible with his
aspirations for a spiritual life, or even for a moral life. But he had the sense
to realize that by himself he was helpless, and therefore he had given over
the reins of his life into the capable and willing hands of his divine
charioteer, who steered him through this dangerous battle with ease,
protected him, and led him to a glorious victory.
In all their years of friendship, Arjuna had never thought of turning to
Krishna for advice because he had always considered himself competent to
solve his own problems. Now, at that crucial hour when he should have
been at the peak of his mental and physical powers, he found himself a
wreck, his mind torn and perplexed as to his duty, and his body weak and
helpless. Only then did he think of turning to the Lord, and having
surrendered his ego, he begged him to come to his aid.
The Lord within us, who is our boon companion, waits patiently for us to
play out our game of make-believe as the sole hero of our life’s drama. He
waits patiently until the day dawns when we stumble and realize that
without the director we are helpless. Only then do we turn to him for help.
At this point, the Lord rushes to us like a loving mother, points out the
clear-cut path of duty, assists us to avoid the forces of evil, and even carries
us across the treacherous crosscurrents of life, if necessary. The message of
the Gita is thus addressed to the ﬁghter, the person of action, for whom life
is a battleﬁeld, as it is to all of us. Kurukshetra (battleﬁeld of the Kurus) has
to be conquered before reaching the haven of dharmakshetra (ﬁeld of
virtue). Life is not merely a battleﬁeld but also a ﬁeld where righteousness
prevails.
The teaching of the Gita is therefore not merely a spiritual philosophy or
an ethical doctrine but a yogashastra, which gives us a clear idea of the
practical application of these doctrines in daily life. The recipient of the
doctrine is Arjuna, the prototype of the struggling human soul who is ready
to receive the great knowledge through close companionship and increasing
nearness to the divine self within him, embodied as his charioteer. The
teacher of the Gita is, therefore, not only the God who is transcendent but
also the God within us, who unveils himself through an increasing
knowledge. He is also the God in us who instigates all our actions and
toward whom all human life proceeds and travels. He is, at once, the secret
guide to our actions, the highest source of all knowledge, and our closest
friend, companion, and relation.
That is why the Gita’s message is still as fresh as when it was ﬁrst given
ﬁve thousand years ago, for it is always renewable in the personal
experience of every human being. The central idea is to reconcile and effect
a unity between the inner, highest spiritual truth in ourselves and the
cosmos on the one hand and the outer actualities of our life and action on
the other. Thus, it is a guide for each one of us in our day-to-day lives.
Whatever the problem we might face, whether horrifying or sanctifying, it
can be solved by the application of the Gita’s teachings. Its meaning is so
deep that the more we read it, the more we learn from it, and the more we
live according to its teaching, the more our level of consciousness rises. Its
message is of eternity, and so it has a timeless signiﬁcance for all of us. It is
not a message conveyed in a mere temporal language to suit a speciﬁc
occasion. Rather, the occasion was taken to convey to the eternal individual
the knowledge of its relationship with the Eternal Absolute. The union of
the jivatma with the Paramatma is the ﬁnal consummation of the Bhagavad
Gita. The word gita means “song” and the Bhagavad Gita is the Song of
God and therefore the song of life—of existence and omniscience, leading
to bliss—sat, chit, and ananda.
The ﬁrst chapter is known as Arjuna vishada yoga, or the yoga of
Arjuna’s despondency, in which he refuses to ﬁght with his relations. The
Lord listens to his arguments quietly, and it is only in the second chapter
that he begins his beautiful sermon. Krishna explains to Arjuna that each
person has a certain duty in life, his swadharma, which depends on his
station, birth, and position in society as well as on his nature. This duty
should be followed regardless of personal prejudices and without
attachment to the fruits. The work itself brings its own reward.
The second chapter gives the philosophy of sankhya yoga, or the yoga of
wisdom, in which the Lord declares the immortality of the soul and the
mortality of the body. We grieve, for we think we are the body and therefore
mortal. This is the root cause of all sorrow. The moment one understands
that one is the atman alone and that the body is a mere appendage that the
atman takes and uses for its own purpose and then discards like a worn-out
garment, then there will be an end to all fears, especially the fear of death.
Even though we know ourselves to be the immortal soul, we have a duty to
carry out the work appointed to us in life. This should be done while
maintaining a balance of mind in the face of all dualities such as pleasure
and pain, gain and loss, treating alike victory and defeat. The grandsire
Bhishma was a perfect example of the sthithaprajna, or the person of
perfection, as portrayed in the second chapter.
In the third, fourth, and ﬁfth chapters, Krishna delineates the glorious path
of karma yoga, or the yoga of action. All of us have been given organs of
action by which we can make our way in the world. The law of the cosmos
is to be endlessly active. Therefore, we who are parts of this active universe
cannot choose to remain inactive, even for a minute. Yet there is a mistaken
understanding that if a person remains inactive as far as the organs of action
are concerned, this can be called inaction. This is a misrepresentation of the
law of karma, says Krishna. The greatest action is done by the mind, and
even one who is inactive physically is never inactive mentally. Again, there
is a mistaken notion that physical action alone binds us to the law of karma.
The Lord asserts that it is not action that binds, for if that were true, no one
could ever become liberated, since no one can be totally actionless. What
binds us is the mind, which imposes certain reasons for doing the action,
primarily the burning desire for the beneﬁts of the action. Thus it is that the
Lord makes his famous statement in the second chapter: “Your right is to
the work alone and not to the fruits thereof.”
Karma binds only when it is done for purely selﬁsh reasons. The same
action, when done selﬂessly with no attachment to the results and in a spirit
of surrender to the Divine, becomes converted to karma yoga, a purifying
process that leads to liberation, or freedom, from the cycle of birth and
death. When karma is blended with the glorious vikarma of love, then it is
transmuted into worship and can be offered to the Divine, just as one would
offer a ﬂower or fruit during the course of worship. Whatever the nature of
the work that one is called upon to perform in the discharge of one’s duty in
life can be considered an act of worship, which can take us to mukti, or
liberation. To renounce the action physically and dwell on it mentally is
denounced vehemently by the Lord as the action of a hypocrite. Thus, a
sannyasi who has physically renounced his hearth and home and retired to
the Himalayas but continues to dwell upon the objects of renunciation with
longing is deluding himself. He is not a true renouncer.
A householder who continues to discharge his duties in a spirit of
detachment and as an offering to the Divine is the true renouncer. We have
only one right and that is the right to do our duty in a spirit of yajna, or
sacriﬁce. The whole of creation works with this spirit of yajna. Nothing is
done for oneself alone. Human beings alone defy this law and thus suffer,
for no one can ﬂout the cosmic laws with impunity. All of creation is a well-
knit whole. Each and everything in the cosmos is irrevocably bound to
everything else. Those who refuse to see this and act purely for selﬁsh
reasons live in vain. Suffering and rebirth alone will be the consequence.
The sixth chapter gives a simple and effective method of dhyana, or
meditation, by which the mind can be trained to achieve union with God.
From the seventh chapter onward, the Lord touches on bhakti yoga, or the
yoga of devotion. The Supreme possesses a twofold nature of matter and
spirit. Matter is his lower nature. A true devotee is one who learns to see the
spirit alone, shining through every atom of matter. After many lives of
progressive spiritual attainment, one acquires this type of spiritual vision
that sees Vaasudeva (the Lord) alone in everything. Such a soul is rare
indeed! Vaasudeva sarvamiti sa mahatma sudurlabha (Rare indeed is the
noble soul who can see everything as Vaasudeva, as divine).
The eighth chapter deals with the little known and thus greatly feared
state called death. The Lord tells Arjuna that whatever thought grips the
mind at the time of death is the one that will propel the soul and decide the
nature of its future birth. Thus, one who wants to attain God after death has
to think of him steadfastly at the time of death. But this is not as simple as it
sounds, for at the time of death, the mind automatically ﬂies to the thought
of that object that has possessed it during its sojourn in the world. If money
has been the object of our life’s pursuit, to money the mind will ﬂy at the
time of death. Thus the Lord tells Arjuna that if he wants to think of God at
the moment of death, he will have to habituate the mind to think of him
constantly. Mam anusmara yudya cha (Think of me constantly and ﬁght).
Thus the yoga of the Gita involves a twenty-four hour affair with the Divine
Beloved, culminating in a total fusion at the time of death, when the
physical body drops away and there is perfect union with the Divine.
Chapter nine gives the mystic secret by which one may attain liberation
even in this very life. A devotee should surrender not only all outer actions
but all inner thoughts at the lotus feet of the Lord. Even the negative
thoughts should be surrendered, for he will slowly bring about a
transmutation of the dross into gold. The one who is thus in constant
communion with him has no need to worry about anything any more, for
the Lord gives a solemn promise that he himself will take care of his or her
material and spiritual welfare. The Lord will supply all his wants, however
mundane, leaving the person free to continue spiritual pursuits, and he will
lead such a one to salvation just as he did the Pandavas. Helpless and
downtrodden, buffeted by the faithless winds of fate, they achieved victory
and recovered their lost heritage only because the Lord was ever with them,
through the gory river of battle, as will be seen. The promise he makes to
Arjuna is in fact given to all of us. Kaunteya pratijanihi na me bhakta
pranashyati (O Arjuna, I pledge to you that my devotee will never perish).
Chapter ten gives the vibhuti yoga, or the yoga of divine glories, so that
the mind of the devotee may learn to see him in all things, both glorious and
mundane. To begin with, we must train ourselves to see him in the majestic
things like the sun, the ocean, and the Himalayas, but later we must learn to
behold him even in the smallest and most insigniﬁcant objects of the world.
One must learn to worship him in both the elephant and the ant, in both the
beautiful as well as the ugly, in both the sinner and the saint.
In the eleventh chapter, Krishna reveals to Arjuna his fearful form as
Kala, or all-consuming time, the greatest killer, the destroyer of all beings.
This vision was different from the one he showed at the Kuru court. It was
at once supremely beautiful and terrifying, for it was a direct answer to
Arjuna’s request to see his cosmic form. The love he bore Arjuna was so
great that he was prepared to grant his every wish. The glory that Arjuna
saw was that of the entire cosmos resting within the form of the Lord. The
vision enabled Arjuna to understand not only that everything emanates from
him, but that he himself is everything.
“Time eternal and all-consuming am I, the ordainer with faces turned to
every side. I am death, which seizes all, as well as the source of life, from
which it all emanates. That which is the seed of all things am I. Supporting
this universe with but a tiny portion of myself do I stand.”
Arjuna realized that all beings are one in God. But the most important
teaching of the chapter, which Arjuna grasped, was that even the actions
that he thought of as his own were really not his but the Lord’s, who used
him as an instrument.
Arjuna was both terriﬁed and enraptured as he gazed on the Lord’s
cosmic form. The countless hosts of both the Kurus and the Pandavas were
seen entering into him. Each arm, each hand, each weapon was an arm, a
hand, and a weapon of the Divine Charioteer. Like moths rushing to a
ﬂame, all these living beings rushed toward him to be consumed in the
ﬁerce and terrible energy that was emanating from him. This fearsome
spectacle overwhelmed Arjuna. He shrank back and begged Krishna to
forgive him for having treated him in a familiar manner. All these years
Arjuna had considered Krishna to be only an exceptional human being, but
now he saw to his consternation that his friend was in reality the one friend
of the whole universe.
“O God of gods! O refuge of the universe! Be kind to me!” he cried,
appalled at the enormity of his offense. “Whatever disrespect I might have
shown to you in the past, pray forgive me, for you are possessed of
boundless compassion.”
Hearing this plea, the Lord once more resumed his previous form, that
delectable form that enraptured all those who saw it. The cosmic form was
shown to Arjuna to make him realize that a human being can neither create
nor destroy. All action is, in fact, universal action. So long as we do not
realize this, we are bound by the results of our actions, but once we do
realize it, then we are no longer bound, for we act as instruments of the
Divine. Our duty is only to make ourselves ﬁtting instruments to be used by
him in whatever capacity he may think ﬁt. Nimitta matram bhava
savyasachin (Do thou be an instrument alone, O Arjuna).
The ﬁnal verse of the chapter sums up the entire teaching of the Gita. “O
son of Pandu, the one who performs action for my sake, who considers me
as the supreme goal of life, who is devoted to me, who is devoid of
attachment, and who is without animosity toward any living being, that one
ﬁnds it easy to attain me.”
The twelfth chapter is known as bhakti yoga, or the yoga of devotion. In
reply to Arjuna’s question, the Lord points out that devotion to the formless
Brahman is very difﬁcult for the human mind to achieve, for the mind is
conditioned to see forms alone. Therefore, it is better to meditate on the
Lord with form, for God can be in any form in which the devotee likes to
picture him. If this is done with the knowledge that all forms merely point
to the formless Purushottama (supreme person), then the devotee will easily
reach the goal that striving yogis attain only after much painful effort. The
devotee of the formless Brahman considers the senses to be betrayers and
suppresses and forces them into submission. The devotee of God with form,
however, enlists the aid of even the senses in worship. The devotee offers
all the activities of the senses, together with the ﬂowers gathered from the
garden, at the lotus feet of the Lord. Seeing his or her beloved in every
form, he or she worships the whole creation. Friendly and compassionate to
all, he or she is contented with whatever he or she gets, for everything is an
image of his or her beloved. Such a devotee is balanced in joy and sorrow,
free from envy, fear, and anxiety. They have no disappointments, since they
have no expectations. They are perfectly satisﬁed with whatever comes
unasked, for everything is a gift from their beloved. Their joy emanates
from a nontemporal source, and their only resolve is to love him and serve
him to the best of their ability.
In the thirteenth chapter, Sri Krishna declares that this body of ours is the
kshetra, or ﬁeld, which the Divine uses as his playground. The Divine Spirit
that thus uses this ﬁeld is known as kshetrajna, or the knower of the ﬁeld.
The bodies of all creatures are the individual ﬁelds of action and the
universe, the universal ﬁeld. But the knower of all these is one and the same
—the Lord himself, the kshetrajna. In the state of ignorance, the jivatma
thinks that it alone is both the knower and the actor. Thus it keeps sowing
the seeds for future births in different ﬁelds and has to reap the harvest of
births in successive wombs. With the dawn of enlightenment, the jiva
realizes that the Lord’s Prakriti is the universal actor and the Lord himself,
the universal knower, and that the individual as a separate entity does not
exist. With this realization, its role as a separate person in the cosmic drama
comes to an end.
In the fourteenth chapter, the three modes of Prakriti—sattva, rajas, and
tamas—are explained. Sattva is the principle of harmony or equilibrium;
rajas, the principle of kinesis or action;  and tamas, the principle of lethargy
or inertia. This is the modus operandi of Prakriti through which she
activates the whole of creation. All imaginable things are formed of a
combination and permutation of these three modes. The way to liberation
lies in overcoming rajas and tamas and developing sattvic qualities like
peace, harmony, and tranquillity, for this provides a ﬁtting background for
the Divine to shine through us. Finally, of course, even sattva has to be
transcended, for even that is a product of Prakriti. The one who has
transcended these three gunas is thus known as trigunatita, and his or her
qualiﬁcations are similar to those of the sthithaprajna of the second chapter
and the karma yogi of the third.
The ﬁfteenth chapter is known as purushottama yoga, or the yoga of the
supreme person, wherein Lord Krishna declares himself to be the
Purushottama who stands above the kshara and the akshara, matter and
spirit, by the interaction of which the entire world process comes into being.
The Purushottama can be said to be above this, inasmuch as he is both
transcendent and immanent. Though he permeates each and every atom,
creation cannot contain him, since the effect cannot contain the cause.
The world process is compared to a mighty tree with its roots stretching
upward to the inﬁnite, its branches spreading downward into the world, and
its aerial roots probing into the earth and binding the embodied soul with its
strong bonds of attachment. Using the sharp-edged sword of discrimination,
one has to cut asunder these clinging roots and thus gain liberation.
The sixteenth and the seventeenth chapters are in the nature corollaries,
and the eighteenth chapter is a grand summing up of the entire teaching. In
the sixteenth chapter, the difference between the Divine and the demonic
qualities is given so that one can try to shun the demonic and develop the
Divine. However noble we may think ourselves, there lurks a devil in each
of our bosoms, and one has to strive hard to eradicate it.
The seventeenth chapter is known as the yoga of the threefold faith, and
the Lord gives a masterly analysis of how the three modes of nature (sattva,
rajas, and tamas) inﬁltrate even our noblest actions such as worship,
charity, austerity, and sacriﬁce, as well as mundane things like the food we
eat. The three modes color every aspect of our action so that the rajasic
person’s charity is for show and ostentation;  the tamasic person’s worship is
a mere mumbling of prayers, with no understanding of their meaning or
effect, lacking faith and ﬁrmness;  while the sattvic soul performs all actions
with ﬁrmness, generosity, and no desire for personal gain. Foods that are
bland and promote mental as well as physical strength, vitality, and health
are known as yogic foods and are sattvic in nature. Rajasic foods are hot
and spicy and give rise to disease and passion. Tamasic foods are stale and
unwholesome and give rise to sloth and sleep. Thus, the Lord analyzes
every aspect of man’s nature and activity and gives a perfect method as to
how best we can try to surmount rajas and tamas, starting from the basic
level with the foods we eat, until our entire system is puriﬁed and we can
transcend the gunas of Prakriti and reach the state of the Purushottama. The
great mantra Aum Tat Sat should be repeated at the beginning and end of
every action, for it denotes the Supreme and reminds the doer that all acts
are done by his Prakriti and that the fruits should be dedicated to him.
Finally, in the last and eighteenth chapter, known as the yoga of liberation
through renunciation, the Lord summarizes all that has been said before. He
reiterates that the real sannyasi is the one who has renounced the sense of
being the doer of actions and such a one is also the real tyagi (renunciate),
for sannyasa is not a mere matter of wearing ocher robes and giving up
home and family life. It entails a renunciation in the mind, of clinging
attachment to the things of the world. Such a one can live in the world and
play a part in the cosmic drama, as an instrument in the hands of the
Purushottama. Thus, Arjuna has to play his part, has to renounce his
tamasic attachment to relatives and take up his mighty bow in the interests
of the world at large. As the Gandiva is in his own hands, so also is he in
the hands of the Divine Archer. Krishna’s ﬁnal words to his beloved
disciple Arjuna and through him to the world are, “Fix your mind on me,
and you will surely attain me. This do I promise you, for you are dearly
beloved by me.” And once again as a ﬁnal benediction, “Having renounced
all dharmas, take refuge in me alone. Verily I promise you that I shall free
you from all sins and lead you to liberation.”
We carry the burden of our lives like mindless donkeys, not realizing that
the Lord within us is ever ready to bear the brunt of our lives, to laugh and
cry with us, to nurse and suckle us, to care for and comfort us. No one is
born alone and none needs to die alone, so why should we live alone? Into
this Kurukshetra of life we are propelled like Arjuna, not alone and helpless
as we think but ever protected by the charioteer within us. He has ever been
with us and is ever ready to help us, provided we allow ourselves to be
helped. We must take off the armor of our separate egos, with which we
think we are protecting ourselves but with which we are actually
barricading ourselves against him, the Paramatma and the Purushottama,
nearer to us than our nearest, dearer than the dearest, sole friend, sole
relation, sole guide for the whole of humanity. Therefore, surrender to him
and live in harmony and peace devoid of cares, like the fortunate child who
cuddles into its mother’s arms and is carried by her through the bustle and
turbulence of life.
Tenderly, the Lord asked his beloved Arjuna, “Have you listened to my
teaching with single-pointed concentration, O Arjuna? Has your delusion
born of ignorance been destroyed?”
At these words, Arjuna, with his mind clear and his nerves and muscles
made as ﬁrm as steel, fearlessly replied, “By your grace, O Lord, my
delusion has gone, and I have gained my senses. I am now ﬁxed in my
resolve and will do as you command.”
Saying this, he sprang to his feet and gave a blast on his conch Devadatta,
while Krishna blew the Panchajanya, sending a thrill of joy through the
Pandava ranks and a shock of fear through the Kauravas. At the end of the
sermon, Sanjaya declared to the blind king, “Blessed am I, O King, for by
the grace of Vyasa, I have heard this thrilling disclosure by the master yogi,
and I am enraptured. Wherever there is Krishna, the master of yoga, and
Partha, the wielder of the bow, there will be prosperity, victory, glory, and
righteousness. This is my ﬁrm conviction.”
Krishna and Arjuna stand for the jivatma and the Paramatma, the
embodied being and God, seated together in the chariot of the body. When
human being and God stand united, when the individual works in
collaboration with the Divine, when he or she becomes the living conscious
instrument of the Divine, then there can never be a defeat. Righteousness
and victory are the natural offspring of this blissful union.
This self is never born, nor does I t ever perish, nor having been
born before will it be born in future. This self is unborn, eternal,
imperishable, and ageless. Though the body is slain, the self does
not perish.
As the spirit in our body wanders on through childhood, youth, and
old age, so it wanders on to a new body. Of this the sage has no
doubt.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Parthasarathaye Namaha!
2 6
T he Mahabharata W
ar
Bhishma Drona thata Jayadrathajala Gandhara Neelothpala,
Shalyagrahavathi Kripena vahani Karnena velakula,
Aswattama Vikarna ghoramakara, Duryodhana vartini,
Sothirna khalu Pandavairananathi Kaivartaka Keshava!
The gory river of battle, whose banks were Bhishma and Drona,
whose water was J ayadratha, whose treacherous blue lotus was
Shakuni, whose shark was Shalya, whose current was Kripa, whose
tidal wave was Karna, whose terrible crocodiles were Aswatthama
and Vikarna, and whose whirlpool was Durodhana, was crossed
over with ease by the Pandavas with Lord Krishna as their
ferryman.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Now everything was ready and the two armies were set to commence the
war. Yudhishtira, over whose head waved the royal insignia of a pure white
umbrella, was seated in his chariot, gazing at the opposite side with a set
and stern face prepared to submit to the will of the Lord and abide by his
duty, however unpalatable it might be. Next came the gigantic Bhima, who
had no qualms about the task at hand and whose mighty arms ached for
having been held back so long from grappling with the wicked Dussasana.
His face was red and ﬁery with repressed anger. Then came Arjuna,
standing tall and radiant in the jeweled chariot with the four milk-white
steeds driven by Lord Krishna, who was shining and resplendent like a
thousand suns risen together. His look, ﬁlled with compassion, was enough
to grant liberation to all those who died gazing at his immaculate form. The
reins of the prancing horses were held lightly, yet ﬁrmly, in his slender
ﬁngers and his unfailing smile swept over the entire host as if in
benediction. Next came the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva, slim and
handsome, their chariots drawn by two steeds with ﬂowing manes and tails
and ﬁery eyes. Then came Drishtadyumna, general of the Pandava army,
Draupadi’s brother, born to kill Drona. Over each warrior waved his own
special pennon.
On the opposite side, in the center of the army, Duryodhana appeared,
riding on an elephant beneath the umbrella of the state. At the head of his
forces under a banner bearing the device of a palm tree stood Bhishma, the
ancient knight, clad in silver armor in a chariot driven by white horses.
Behind him was Drona, with red horses, and the heroic Karna, waiting to
succeed to the command at the fall of Bhishma. Duryodhana, who always
suspected that Drona’s and Bhishma’s allegiance lay elsewhere, approached
his preceptor and warned him in veiled terms of the consequences of not
discharging his duty. “Behold, O teacher, the mighty army of the Pandavas
arrayed for the battle, under the command of your wise disciple
Drishtadyumna, the son of Drupada!”
This was a deliberate jibe at Drona, who had been stupid enough, so
Duryodhana thought, to teach the art of warfare to the son of his archenemy,
Drupada, who had sworn to kill him. Duryodhana, of course, could never
understand the high code of chivalry that motivated great souls like Drona,
Bhishma, and Yudhishtira. He warned Drona in no uncertain terms that his
duty was to protect Bhishma at all costs. The grandsire roared like a lion
and blew his mighty conch, which was a sign for the battle to commence.
At that signal, Yudhishtira, to the amazement of the onlookers, dismounted
and walked unarmed up to Bhishma and Drona. The Kauravas sneered
mockingly, for they thought that this was a last cowardly gesture on the part
of the Pandava king. Fearlessly, he walked up to the elders, bowed low, and
spoke, “In our desire for the kingdom, we have dared to array ourselves
against you, who are worthy of worship. Pray forgive us and bless us and
grant us permission to ﬁght against you.”
Drona and Bhishma were full of love and admiration for this great pupil
of theirs, who had never deviated from the path of dharma. Both of them
blessed him and gave him permission to ﬁght against them. After
Yudhishtira returned, Bhishma warned Duryodhana that he would never kill
any of the Pandavas, who were like his grandsons, but instead he promised
that he would destroy ten thousand of their soldiers daily.
Krishna now took Arjuna to get the blessings of the grandsire, who
welcomed them and said, “Hail, O Madhava (Krishna). You know the past,
present, and future. Everything is a divine sport to you. As long as I carry
weapons, I can never be killed by anyone but you, O Krishna. Therefore, I
desire that you might take up arms against me. Let me see if you will grant
my wish!” Then, turning to Arjuna, his favorite grandson, the old knight
laid his hands lovingly and tenderly on his head and blessed him. With eyes
ﬁlled with tears, Arjuna saluted the grandsire and returned. Yudhishtira now
shouted to the opposing rank, “Is there anyone among you who is desirous
to come over to our side? If so, you are welcome.” At this, Yuyutsu, a great
warrior and the illegitimate son of Dhritharashtra by a maidservant, walked
over to the Pandava camp and was welcomed.
J ust then a small bird, a lapwing, who had built her nest on the turf in the
middle of the battleﬁeld, drew the attention of the Lord by her cries of
anxiety and distress for her young.
“Poor little mother,” he said tenderly, “let this be your protection.”
So saying, he removed the nest to the side of the ﬁeld and placed a great
elephant bell, which lay on the ground, over the nest. Through the eighteen
days of the raging battle that followed, the lapwing and its nestlings were
kept in safety by the mercy of the Lord, who never failed to give it some
food daily and who was the only one who could spare a thought to the
smallest of his creations, even at such a crucial time as this. Similar was the
care he took over every person on the battleﬁeld, even though people’s
limited vision may not have been able to appreciate this fact fully. Some
deserved death and others life, and to each was given his just deserts. But
everything was done so unobtrusively that it appeared to be by chance. It
was ever his way to look on the world as if it were a play. Sometimes he
would remove an obstacle so that the will of the players would have
unimpeded scope and sometimes place an obstacle for the same reason. In
this way, he allowed events to work themselves out, according to the law of
karma, striving ever to aid the course of destiny, even though this led in the
end to the self-destruction of all things. In this battle, he guided the fortunes
of both sides in an unobtrusive manner, but for the sake of the Pandavas,
who had surrendered their all to him, he often broke his normal code of
conduct and actively took a lead, even though his role as a charioteer was
apparently that of the uninvolved witness. He thus saved them many times
from the consequences of their own folly. If there was any adharmic
(unrighteous) act to be done, he always did it himself, for the Lord is above
his own laws, whereas for a human being to transgress these laws would
have resulted in infamy and ruin. A devotee may act in a quixotic and
sometimes foolhardy way, but the Lord will intervene and save him, even at
the risk of getting a bad name. With his wide-angled vision, encompassing
all the three states of time—past, present, and future—he is ever able to
judge and decide what is best for his creation. By the sheer power of their
love for him and the total surrender of their egos, the Pandavas compelled
the Lord to do all things for them, just as Bhishma compelled him by the
power of his love to take up arms against him, as will be seen.
Bhishma sparked off the battle by his clarion call to the ranks, “O
Kshatriyas! Here is a golden opportunity for you to exhibit your heroism.
We are now standing on the threshold of heaven. The portals are open to
you. To die of old age and disease on a comfortable bed in his own house is
a shame for a Kshatriya! To die on a battleﬁeld ﬁghting for a righteous
cause is his supreme fortune. Dying thus, bravely, with your bodies pierced
all over with arrows, you will directly go to heaven.” So saying, he gave
another blast on his conch. The battle cry was echoed by the opposing
ranks, and the horses and chariots charged forward with bloodcurdling
cries.
The ﬁrst day’s battle, however, was fought on a cautious note. Both
armies had been arranged in phalanxes that were difﬁcult to penetrate.
Arjuna, after humbly paying his respects to the grandsire, proceeded to
engage him in a ﬁerce combat. A few Kaurava brothers, as well as Shakuni
and Shalya, came to his assistance, while Bhima and Arjuna’s son
Abhimanyu joined Arjuna. Bhishma’s banner was felled by Arjuna and his
horses killed by Abhimanyu. Arjunda then proceeded to rout Shalya,
Shakuni, and the Kaurava brothers and then went on to intercept Bhishma,
who had turned away from Arjuna and was creating havoc among the
Pandava ranks.
It was a wonderful sight to see the oldest and the youngest of the Kuru
warriors forestalling each other with expertise! Finally, a brilliant lad of
sixteen, who was almost his father’s equal in warfare, managed to wound
not only Bhishma but also Shalya and Kritavarma, who had joined the
attack. Drishtadyumna challenged Drona but was routed. Uttara, the young
prince of Matsya, now challenged Bhishma, cut off his staff, killed his
charioteer, and destroyed chariot after chariot. After his training with
Arjuna, he had turned out to be a formidable ﬁghter. Bhishma was in a
dilemma what to do with this boy, but Shalya had no such qualms. He
aimed a deadly javelin at his heart and killed Uttara instantly. This was the
ﬁrst adharmic act of the war. Sveta, his elder brother, was furious at seeing
how his young brother had been killed and turned his fury on Bhishma. He
possessed an invincible bow from Lord Shiva, and Bhishma found himself
helpless against his onslaught. Realizing that Sveta was invincible so long
as he held his bow, Bhishma taunted him, “Were you taught only archery?
Cannot you ﬁght with a sword?”
The chivalrous Sveta immediately accepted the challenge and took up his
sword. Now Bhishma, too, tarnished his fair name by cutting off Sveta’s
right arm with an arrow. Sveta continued to ﬁght with his sword in his left
hand, but Bhishma severed his other arm as well, and Sveta slowly bled to
death. In utter dismay, Yudhishtira tried his best to console King Virata for
the loss of both his beloved sons on the very ﬁrst day of the battle. Thus the
day ended on a disastrous note for the Pandavas, and Duryodhana was
jubilant.
The second day was a stalemate. On the third day, Bhishma arranged his
army in the eagle formation, and the Pandavas formed a crescent. Arjuna, as
usual, engaged Bhishma. Gatotkacha, who was the gigantic son of Bhima
by his rakshasi wife, created havoc in the Kaurava ranks. The rakshasas
were capable of using many magic stratagems, but Krishna forbade
Gatotkacha to use them unless the other party resorted to similar tactics.
The sixth day was marked by great slaughter on both sides. Drona proved
irresistible. After killing thirteen of the Kaurava brothers, Bhima fought and
defeated Duryodhana, who fell unconscious and had to be carried off the
ﬁeld by his brother-in-law, J ayadratha. That night, Duryodhana went to
Bhishma, who consoled him and gave him a potion to relieve his pain. On
the seventh day, Bhima’s tally of Kaurava brothers reached twenty-six, and
Duryodhana, for the ﬁrst time, wept in front of Bhishma, who told him, “It
is too late to grieve now. Warriors should go to battle, expecting to die.”
Duryodhana could not brook this piece of salutary advice and sent his
brother Dussasana to Bhishma, asking him to step down and let Karna take
up the leadership. Karna had boastfully promised his friend that he would
slaughter the entire Pandava host if Bhishma would only relinquish his post.
Arjuna’s son Iravan, though considerably maimed by the sacriﬁce of his
ﬂesh, was still seen to be creating havoc, until at last he was killed. The
Pandavas were sunk in gloom, and Arjuna had to be consoled by Krishna.
On the eighth day, the Pandava army arranged itself in a three-pronged
formation led by Bhima, Satyaki, and Yudhishtira. Sixteen more of the
Kauravas fell under Bhima’s mace, making the tally forty-two. That night
again, Duryodhana asked Bhishma to retire. The latter reminded him of his
folly in having denied the Pandavas their birthright and having insulted
Draupadi. He refused to retire from the battleﬁeld so long as he was alive
and promised to do better the next day. The next day, Bhishma appeared to
be the incarnation of the god of death himself! His ﬁery astras (weapons)
burned up the Pandava army, and they realized that so long as he was alive,
they would have no hope of victory. The Lord knew that Arjuna’s
fainthearted attempts at ﬁghting with the grandsire were going to prolong
the war unnecessarily. At last, on the ninth day, when he saw that Arjuna
was still avoiding a serious confrontation, he himself jumped out of the
chariot, holding aloft a broken chariot wheel like a discus in his hand, in
mock anger, as if to kill Bhishma. Bhishma was overjoyed. With folded
palms, he welcomed him and said, “Hail to you, O lotus-eyed one! Blessed
am I to meet death at your hands.”
Arjuna jumped out of the chariot, caught Krishna’s upraised arm, and
promised to do better. Thus, the Lord’s show of anger had two effects. He
was able to fulﬁll Bhishma’s desire to see him take up arms, even at the cost
of transgressing his own word, and he was able to whip up the desired
wrath in Arjuna.
Duryodhana, on the other hand, was constantly taunting and deriding the
grandsire for his half-hearted attempts against the Pandavas, even though he
was keeping his promise of destroying ten thousand Pandava soldiers daily.
The old man bore up with the insults and continued to do his duty. Drona
had been similarly insulted by Duryodhana for not doing his duty, so he also
started to harass the Pandava host.
That night, as suggested by Krishna, when darkness had descended and
the soldiers on both sides lay chanting around the ﬁres, the ﬁve brothers
silently slipped into the tent of their beloved grandsire. Bhishma’s heart
rejoiced at the sight of these men whom he loved dearly. Tenderly, he asked
them why they had come, and Yudhishtira spoke.
“Grandfather,” he said, “it is impossible for us to attain victory so long as
you lead the Kaurava host. We have come, therefore, to ask you to tell us
how we can kill you, for we have heard that you cannot be killed without
your volition.”
Strange question for a grandchild to put and stranger still the answer. The
aged knight smiled gently. He knew that the time for release had come at
last. He had the power to depart from this life as and when he pleased. That
same ﬁdelity that had for such a long time bid him stay was now beckoning
him to leave. He was tired of life, tired of the indiscriminate slaughter of the
past few days, tired of listening to Duryodhana’s incessant taunts. All these
years, he had done his best to keep aloft the banner of the Kuru dynasty,
even at the cost of personal happiness. Now he realized that the only way to
make his life’s mission a success was for the Pandavas to rule. For the
accomplishment of this purpose, he would have to make the last and ﬁnal
sacriﬁce of his own life, for as long as he lived, they would never win, and
for this also he was totally prepared.
“It is true, my child,” he said to Yudhishtira, “that your hope of victory
while I am alive is in vain. Neither may you hope to slay me while I am
armed. But mark you well, I will not ﬁght against those who are afraid, or
those who are weak from wounds or illness, or those who have surrendered
to me. Nor will I take up arms against a woman or one who has been a
woman before. If you attack me tomorrow from behind such a person, you
will accomplish your purpose and achieve my death.”
He spoke calmly and happily, as if he were discussing the weather rather
than the method of his end, abiding to the last by the high code of dharma
and chivalry that he had always followed. Then Krishna reminded the
brothers that Shikandin, the brother of Draupadi, was such a warrior, who
had been born a woman and had changed her sex.
So it was arranged, in front of Bhishma himself, that Arjuna would ﬁght
with Bhishma the next day, keeping Shikandin in front of him, so that
Bhishma would not retaliate. A wave of love and remorse swept over
Arjuna as the plans were completed. He remembered the days of his
childhood when he used to be dandled and caressed by the old man, for he
had always been his favorite. How could he, who had been so tenderly
loved, aim the fatal arrow at the heart of this beloved warrior? Arjuna wept
unashamedly, and it was Bhishma himself who had to remind him of his
duty as a Kshatriya and steel him to a stern performance of it. The Lord’s
compassionate glance swept over Bhishma and blessed him. The brothers
departed as silently as they had come, leaving Bhishma with a vast sense of
relief that at last the long and weary journey was coming to an end.
It could well be asked why the Lord, who knew all things, did not tell the
Pandavas how Bhishma could be killed, but as usual he always preferred to
allow the true nature of each character to unfold itself so that the world
would come to realize the greatness of his devotees.
The tenth day dawned, and Bhishma knew it to be his last day of ﬁghting
in the battleﬁeld of life. Happily, he propitiated the gods before proceeding
to the battle. The Kauravas noted with dismay the many bad omens that
were seen on their side. The sun rose bright and Bhishma plunged into the
fray. Wherever he went, Arjuna’s chariot pursued him. Shikandin stood in
front, beside the Divine Charioteer, and Arjuna from behind the maiden
knight shot arrow after arrow at his beloved grandsire. Scorning to shoot at
one who had once been a woman, Bhishma would laughingly aim an arrow
at Arjuna whenever a sudden turn of the wheels gave him a chance. The
Kauravas did their best to protect him, but Krishna maneuvered the chariot
so brilliantly that Arjuna was able to ﬁght his way right up to the
grandsire’s chariot. Bhishma laughed with joy for he knew the end was fast
approaching, but he was determined to terminate his earthly career in a
blaze of glory, doing his duty to the last. He let ﬂy showers of arrows at
Arjuna’s chariot, carefully avoiding Shikandin. Many arrows pierced the
Lord, who looked resplendent with droplets of blood all over him from the
puja of arrows by his devotee. He continued to smile enchantingly at
Bhishma, who rejoiced and felt refreshed at the sight of that splendid form
brandishing a whip and maneuvering the horse in front of him. Arjuna’s and
Shikandin’s arrows, which were clustering thicker and thicker on his body,
seemed like mere darts to him, for all he could behold was the Lord’s
enchanting form. Suddenly, with a swoop, Krishna closed in on him,
preventing anyone else from coming in between. Raising his conch, the
Panchajanya, to his lips, he blew long and loud. The sound was of the
primeval sound aum. It ﬁlled Bhishma’s ears, and his mind became ﬁxed on
that inﬁnite absolute, which the sound represented. His eyes pinned
themselves on the physical form of that absolute that he saw standing before
him, holding the reins of his destroyer’s chariot. That formless one who had
taken on a form to enchant the whole world now seemed to be calling him
to stop the game and go to him.
Arjuna fought as one possessed, for he had shut his mind to everything
but the stern call of duty. Rising above the dualities of love and hate, pain
and pleasure, he sent arrow after arrow at his beloved grandsire, piercing
him all over. Yudhishtira could not see because of the tears that blinded
him, but Bhishma was happy that only Arjuna’s arrows could pierce him
and not Shikandin’s. There was no sound on the ﬁeld except that of
whizzing arrows. The drums and trumpets were dumb, as were all the
warriors. Everyone watched the mighty drama with trepidation. At last, the
time for the mortal wound had come. The end of the day and the end of his
life: Bhishma received the fatal arrow straight into his heart. With his body
torn to shreds by his grandson’s arrows, his face lit up with a smile of great
beauty. With his eyes clinging lovingly to the face of the Lord, which was
resplendent in the last rays of the dying sun, the great Bhishma fell, but he
did not touch the ground, for he was entirely covered with arrows, and he
lay, as it were, on a couch of arrows. The sky sent a shower of rain, and a
wail rose up from both the ranks that resounded in all the quarters. It was as
if Mother Earth were crying out in pain at the death of one of her greatest
sons. Even now, death could not approach him, for as he fell, he
remembered that the year was still in its dark half—dakshinayana (J une to
December)—an inauspicious time for the passing of the soul. He
determined to stay alive until the beginning of the summer solstice,
uttarayana, when the sun would start its northbound journey.
With the fall of Bhishma, a truce was called, and warriors from both
camps crowded around him. With barefeet and bare chests, the heroes
surrounded the fallen grandsire. All of them shared the same grief. They
would have carried him away to a more comfortable place, since he had
expressed his wish to remain alive until uttarayana, but he refused to move
from the spot where he had fallen, impaled on sharp arrows.
“This is a ﬁtting bed for a warrior,” he said, “but I would like a support
for my head.”
His head was the only part of him that was free from arrows. Duryodhana
had soft pillows brought for him, but he would have none of these. “Arjuna,
my child,” he said, looking at him who had provided him with a hero’s bed.
It is said that only Arjuna’s arrows had struck him, while Shikandin’s had
fallen off. “Get me a pillow to rest my head, as you have given me a bed.”
Arjuna was standing dumb with grief, hardly able to look at that beloved
face, but he understood his request and shot three arrows in quick
succession down into the earth with such accuracy that they formed a
perfect support for the hoary head of the mighty warrior. There was a raging
thirst within him, and his tongue clung to the roof of his mouth. Bhishma
asked for water, but Duryodhana’s jar of water failed to quench his thirst.
Again, he looked at Arjuna, and an unmistakable message passed from his
eyes. Arjuna shot an arrow deep into the womb of the earth, and a gush of
water sprang forth, straight into Bhishma’s mouth. It is said that Mother
Ganga herself came out of the earth to quench the thirst of her beloved son.
Bhishma gave a sigh of relief and looked gratefully at his beloved grandson.
Arjuna also felt as if that look, like the cooling waters of the Ganga, helped
to assuage in some small measure the burning pain in his heart.
Bhishma ordered Duryodhana to dig a deep trench around him so that
wild animals could not approach. He forbade him to erect a tent or anything
else over him, for he wanted to be left alone to spend his remaining days in
solitude and worship. “Those of you who are alive after the war may come
and see me at the beginning of uttarayana,” he said. Then, turning to
Duryodhana, he said, “My dear child, please listen to me now, at least. Let
this enmity cease with my death. It impossible for you to defeat the
Pandavas. If you do not stop the war now, you will all perish. Please heed
my words and put an end to this senseless carnage.” Duryodhana hung his
head and remained silent. Bhishma closed his eyes sadly and surrendered to
the inevitable.
In the Kaurava camp, Karna fully expected that he would be appointed
general. But after consulting everyone, it was decided that Drona should
take over the command, as he might be displeased otherwise. So the next
few days saw Drona at the helm, but his leadership lacked the grandeur of
Bhishma’s. The eleventh day saw Karna in the midst of the Pandava forces
wreaking havoc as he had promised to do. Among the Pandava army,
Abhimanyu was the hero of the day, ﬁghting single-handedly against many
of the Kaurava heroes. Duryodhana ordered Drona to capture Yudhishtira
alive, for that would put an effective end to the war. Drona promised to do
his best, but at the end of the day, he had to confess failure. Duryodhana
taunted him as usual and stung him to the quick. Drona retaliated and said,
“As long as Bhima with his mighty mace and Arjuna guided by Krishna are
protecting Yudhishtira, there is no hope of capturing him either alive or
dead.”
The Trigarta brothers now promised to lure Arjuna away from
Yudhishtira, and Drona said he would try again the next day. News of
Duryodhana’s master plan to capture the king alive was brought to the
Pandavas. They decided to guard Yudhishtira on all sides, Arjuna and
Abhimanyu in front, Bhima behind, and Nakula and Sahadeva on the sides.
However, the Trigartas challenged Arjuna to a battle two miles away. He
was forced to go, but gave strict instructions to his son and his brothers not
to leave the king unprotected at any time. However, despite their best
efforts, they could not stop Drona from penetrating their barricade, and at
last Yudhishtira was forced to retreat.
On his return after defeating the Trigartas, Arjuna was forestalled by
Bhagadatta, the son of Narakasura, mounted on his ferocious elephant.
Even Bhima was having a terrible time with him. Seeing Arjuna, he turned
the full blast of his fury on him but was unable to close on him because of
Krishna’s skillful maneuvering of the chariot. At last, in fury he charged his
goad with the deadly Vaishnava mantra and hurled it at Arjuna with all his
might. It streaked like lightning toward him, splitting the arrows that Arjuna
discharged in defense. Had it reached its mark it would surely have been the
end of Arjuna, but the Lord cast off his whip and reins and stood up to
receive the fatal weapon on his own chest. To the amazement of all, the
goad changed into a garland of ﬂowers, a vanamala, the emblem of Lord
Vishnu, and adorned the neck of the Divine Charioteer, who was none other
than the incarnation of Vishnu. He explained to Arjuna that this weapon had
been given by him in a previous incarnation to the Earth goddess, who had
presented it to her son, Narakasura, who in turn had given it to his son
Bhagadatta. It would kill anyone who was armed. Without his goad,
Bhagadatta was vulnerable and was easily killed by Arjuna.
The twelfth day ended with Drona still being unable to capture
Yudhishtira. In the evening, unable to bear Duryodhana’s taunts, Drona took
an oath that the next day he would either capture Yudhishtira or kill one of
the best warriors on the Pandava side. On the thirteenth day, therefore, he
arranged his army in the padmavyuha, or lotus formation. He himself
remained in the center and stationed all their great warriors in each
concentric circle of the formation. The remainder of the Trigartas were
known as the Samsaptakas, and they swore to ﬁght to the last man and keep
Arjuna away from the main battle. Arjuna was forced to go, and Drona
began to wreak havoc with his impenetrable formation. It soon became
obvious that unless the vyuha was broken, the Pandava army would be
exterminated.
Only Arjuna knew the method of entering into the heart of the lotus
formation and returning the same way, after having broken it. His son
Abhimanyu knew how to penetrate it but did not know how to return. It is
said that while he was in the womb of his mother, Subhadra, the Lord, her
brother, had begun to explain to her the method of penetrating the
padmavyuha. When he came to the end of the ﬁrst half, he realized that his
sister was sleeping, so he stopped his instruction, and Abhimanyu never
after came to learn how to come out of the formation.
Yudhishtira was now at his wits’ end. Since Arjuna was nowhere in sight
and the formation had to be broken, he was forced to ask Abhimanyu to
break open the vyuha. The lad readily agreed but shyly told him that he did
not know how to return, and Bhima and others would have to follow closely
before the enemies closed the breach. Invoking a mantra taught by Krishna,
Abhimanyu was able to drive a wedge into the hitherto impenetrable vyuha.
Expecting Bhima to follow, he drove through this wedge, cutting down the
opposing hordes on all sides with unerring arrows. Duryodhana’s brother-
in-law, J ayadratha, however, quickly closed the gap with his elephant army.
To stop Bhima from following, he threw a garland of unfading ﬂowers
given to him by Lord Shiva in Bhima’s path. Bhima was charging behind
Abhimanyu, but when he saw the garland of his chosen deity, he stood
rooted to the spot. “Not even for the sake of saving the life of my brother’s
child will I cross over and desecrate this garland of my Lord,” he said and
returned to Yudhishtira.
Abhimanyu cut his way deep into the formation. Drona, Shalya, Karna,
and a host of Kaurava warriors tried to oppose this brilliant boy, but he
defeated them all and threw their entire army into confusion. Both
Duryodhana and Dussasana were defeated and had to beat a hasty retreat.
Duryodhana’s son, Lakshmana, accompanied by ten thousand soldiers now
attacked Abhimanyu, but he was killed by his brilliant cousin. Duryodhana
could not bear it when he heard the news. “This lad must he killed at all
costs,” he said, “by fair means or foul!”
All of them realized that he could never be conquered in a fair ﬁght since
he had defeated all their best warriors individually. So, throwing fair play to
the winds, the Kauravas now closed in on Abhimanyu and attacked him
from all sides as he stood in the center of the lotus. Karna crept up from
behind and broke his bow, and Drona killed his charioteer. Abhimanyu was
now surrounded by Drona, Karna, Kripa, Asvattama, Kritavarma,
Dussasana, Duryodhana, and J ayadratha. Like a lion facing a pack of
jackals, he faced his opponents, undaunted by them, ﬁtting son and nephew
of Arjuna and Krishna. With amazing brilliance, he kept his attackers at
bay, hoping against hope that his uncle would soon come to his rescue. With
lightning movements of his sword, he managed to prevent even a single
arrow from scratching him. Suddenly, he sprang onto Drona’s chariot and
smashed it to pieces. Looking at him disdainfully, Abhimanyu said, “You
are a Brahmin and the commander of the Kaurava forces and yet you allow
this injustice— six maharathas to attack a single warrior like me!” He
turned to Karna and said, “I thought at least you were capable of some
nobility. Aren’t you ashamed to have attacked me from the rear?”
He had no time to talk, for, disregarding the codes of warfare, Drona cut
off the lad’s right arm, which was brandishing the sword. Undaunted,
Abhimanyu took up the sword in his left hand and continued to terrorize his
opponents. But Drona cruelly sent another arrow with unerring accuracy
and broke his sword. Now he was defenseless, his bow and sword broken,
his charioteer killed, and his right arm cut off. Maimed and bleeding,
Abhimanyu took up a fallen chariot wheel in his left hand and whirled it
around, thus keeping his attackers at bay. Again he said, “I’m giving you a
chance to redeem your honor. Come and ﬁght with me one by one, and I
can still kill you all.” Saying this, he rushed at Drona, whirling the chariot
wheel and looking like Lord Vishnu himself. He was a most remarkable
sight as he stood there torn and bleeding, with a smile on his lips and the
wheel held aloft in his left hand. Even before he could ﬂing it at Drona, the
six great heroes of the Kaurava army closed in on him and smashed the
wheel into a thousand fragments. Abhimanyu now took up a mace. Once
again, he said scornfully, “Come to me one by one, O heroes, and I shall
defeat you.”
Abhimanyu now turned on Dussasana’s son, and the two closed in deadly
combat. Weak from loss of blood, the boy fainted for a minute. Before he
could rise up, at Duryodhana’s instigation, J ayadratha crept up from behind
and smashed the weak and bleeding boy’s skull with his mace, while
Dussasana’s son pounced on his fallen body and hacked him to death. Six
great Kauravara warriors had dared to commit this most dastardly crime on
the holy ﬁeld of Kurukshetra. Arjuna’s noble son was lying dead in the dust
and grime of the battleﬁeld, and these ghoulish men danced around the
corpse in exultation. The common soldiers beheld him as he lay in the mud
like a lotus bud, trampled by a herd of mad elephants, and they wept
unashamedly. Vyasa says that even the vultures that ﬂew around the
battleground incessantly seemed to be lamenting and saying, “Not thus! Not
thus! We do no want any share of this noble body!”
The massacre of Abhimanyu was such a dastardly act that it is supposed
to have marked the end of the Dwapara Age and to usher in the Iron Age of
Kali, in which we now live.
The spirit is not born, neither does it die. Nor does it come into
ex istence at birth. I t is birthless, constant, eternal, and ancient. I t is
not slain when the body is slain.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Kaalatmane Namaha!
2 7
T he E nd of  the W
ar
Prapanna paarijataya, totravaitraika panaye,
Jnanamudraya Krishnaya, Gitamritaduhe namaha.
Salutations to Krishna, who is the wish-fulﬁlling tree of those who
take refuge in him. One hand holds the whip and the other is held in
jnanamudra (symbol of knowledge). It is he who has milked for us
the divine ambrosia of the Gita.
Yudhishtira’s state of mind on hearing of Abhimanyu’s death can well be
imagined. He blamed himself bitterly for his folly in having sent the boy to
his doom. In the meantime, Arjuna, after having defeated the Samsaptakas,
was returning, ﬁlled with foreboding, for he knew not what. The Lord knew
very well what had happened and invoked the aid of Indra, Arjuna’s father,
to save him. Indra took the form of an old man, made a huge ﬁre, and was
just preparing to jump into it when Arjuna and Krishna came along. When
Arjuna intervened, the old man said, “You would do the same if you were in
my position, for I have just lost my only son.”
In order to comfort him Arjuna replied, “Please refrain from this ignoble
act. I swear to you by Lord Krishna and my Gandiva that were I to lose my
son, I would never stoop to such an act!”
The old man seemed appeased by this pronouncement. Arjuna returned to
the chariot, and Krishna drove off, but the Lord took the extra precaution of
hiding Arjuna’s weapons. On reaching the camp, Arjuna saw the silence
and the way everyone seemed to be avoiding his eyes, and he asked the
Lord, “Tell me, what calamity has befallen us?” He looked at the Lord’s
face and saw a glimmer of tears in those lotus eyes.
“My nephew has been killed,” he said.
Unable to bear the shock, Arjuna fainted. There was a deathly silence in
the camp. None of the brothers could speak a word. On recovering, Arjuna
took up the mangled remains of his beloved son and lamented, “O mighty
hero! You were able to discharge your arrows even before your enemies
could string their bows, so how could they have killed you? Have you really
gone to the realm of the dead? Why did I leave you and go? What will I say
to your poor mother? O brothers! Knowing how much I loved him, how
could you have sent him alone to his doom? Sahadeva, light a ﬁre. I want to
join my son!”
Sahadeva obeyed without protest, for he knew that Krishna would save
Arjuna. Yudhishtira was too scared to interfere, for he felt wretchedly
guilty. All he could do was look imploringly at Krishna. Arjuna, however,
refused even to look at the Lord, for he knew that he could have saved his
son had he so wished. Krishna summoned Indra again, and the old man
whom Arjuna had prevented from suicide now appeared and reminded him
of his oath not to take his life.
It might be asked why the Lord had not stopped Abhimanyu’s murder.
The special message of Lord Krishna to Arjuna in the Gita is the message of
the divinity in the human soul. By the force of power generated in the
performance of nishkama karma, the performance of one’s duty without
desiring the fruits thereof, it is able to unfold itself from the veil of its own
lower nature and reach the full ﬂowering of its divine status. The outcome
of such action is our liberation from the limited ego and our elevation to a
higher nature that is divine, enabling us to act in the world in the truth of the
spirit, for the sake of God in the world and not for the sake of our own
limited egos. To call Arjuna to such an action, to make him aware of the
power that was in him and that acted through him, was the purpose of the
embodied godhead. To this end, the Divine himself had become his
charioteer. To this end, the vision of the world Purusha and the divine
command to action had been given to him.
The sermon of the second chapter had shown him that, though the body is
slain, the soul can never die, for one is purely temporal and the other
eternal. Treating alike pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow, victory and defeat,
his duty was to ﬁght in the battleﬁeld of life as an instrument of the Divine.
For this, both Arjuna and the rest of the Pandavas had to pass through the
ﬁre of sorrow and suffering many times in the course of their lives. The
avatara of the Lord was not to put an end to the dualities of life but to
provide a ﬁrm bedrock of knowledge, faith, and action that would help one
to rise above it as a sthithaprajna, one established in the highest knowledge.
He reminded Arjuna now of this great message of the second chapter, but
Arjuna was sunk in gloom and no dry philosophy, however exalted, could
comfort him. Knowing his psychology, the Lord rallied him, “O Arjuna!
Why are you mourning like a woman? Instead of shedding tears like this,
should you not be asking for the name of his murderer and taking revenge?”
Arjuna was a man of action, and this was just the way to deal with him.
He jumped up, and having learned of J ayadratha’s perﬁdy, he swore, “I
swear by my Lord Krishna and my Gandiva that if I do not kill J ayadratha,
who was responsible for my son’s death, by sunset tomorrow, I shall
immolate myself in the ﬁre!” The brothers were temporarily relieved and
looked gratefully at the Lord.
Arjuna begged Krishna to break the news of her son’s death to Subhadra,
since he could not face her. Krishna went to his dear sister. She could not
control her grief on hearing the dreadful news. After allowing her to weep
unchecked for some time, he spoke to her, “Dear sister, you are the daughter
of the clan of the Vrishnis, you are the wife of the greatest archer in the
world and the mother of a hero. Wipe away your tears, as beﬁtting the
mother of such a son. Abhimanyu was killed by unfair means. He died the
death of a hero. He was mercilessly murdered by six of the greatest warriors
on the Kaurava side, since they could not tackle him single-handed. Cast
away this sorrow and remember that today your son is with the gods.
Arjuna has sworn to kill J ayadratha, who manipulated your son’s death.
Stop this weeping and comfort Uttara, who is bearing Abhimanyu’s son in
her womb. Guard her carefully, for danger awaits the fetus.”
So saying, he took her to Uttara, and after comforting both of them and
Draupadi, he returned to Arjuna. The latter was waiting to worship him
before retiring to bed, as was his daily custom. After the puja, he offered
ﬂowers, fruit, and honey to Krishna. The Lord blessed him and told him to
go to bed, for the next day would be the most taxing he had had so far. He
would have to plow through the ranks of the Kauravas before reaching
J ayadratha. The year was in the second half, dakshinayana, when the sun
was in the southern solstice and would set early.
That night, Arjuna had a curious dream. He thought that he was taken by
the Lord to Kailasa, the abode of Lord Shiva. On the way, Arjuna felt weak
and hungry but refused to eat until he had ﬁnished his formal worship of the
Shiva lingam. Krishna told him to worship him instead, and Arjuna obeyed,
offering the ﬂowers and the garland made for Shiva to him. The Lord sat in
the pose of Dakshinamurti, the meditating Shiva, and accepted Arjuna’s
offerings. When they reached Kailasa, Arjuna was astonished to see the
garland he had offered to Krishna adorning the blue neck of Shiva. The
latter knew what was passing through his mind and told him, “Know, O
Arjuna, Krishna and I are one and the same! We are none other than the
impersonal, formless Brahman.”
Krishna now spoke, “We have come here so that Arjuna can receive your
blessings for killing J ayadratha, who has received some boons from you.”
J ayadratha had practised severe austerities to Lord Shiva in order to
procure boons from him for the annihilation of the Pandavas. Though Shiva
had given him the boons, he had also warned him that his evil machinations
would have no effect against the Pandavas, who were protected by Krishna.
Lord Shiva then demonstrated to Arjuna how the Pasupata weapon he had
given him could be used to full effect, since that was the only weapon that
could save him from what J ayadratha had.
In the meantime, Yudhishtira, in his obsession to adhere to dharma at all
costs, ordered Gatotkacha, Bhima’s son, to inform the enemy of Arjuna’s
oath. He was rudely received by Duryodhana, who was far from being
grateful for the message and proceeded to abuse the messenger. When
J ayadratha heard the death sentence, he was all set to ﬂee to his own
country, but Duryodhana assured him that he would be given every
protection. The next morning, he was sent to a hiding place, twelve miles
away from the Pandava camp.
On the morning of the fourteenth day, Arjuna was again challenged by the
remnants of the Samsaptakas. He routed them in no time and pushed
forward, but Drona intercepted him.
Arjuna spoke, “Though you played an active part in my son’s death, yet
you are my preceptor, and I will not kill you. But let me pass, for I must get
to J ayadratha soon.”
Drona was already bitterly regretting the part he had played and allowed
him to pass, unmolested. Arjuna plowed his way through the ranks of the
Kaurava army, which had been detailed to stop him at all costs from
reaching J ayadratha before sunset. Next, he was accosted by Srutayudha,
who had a mace that could kill anyone instantly, but if it hit an unarmed
person, it would ricochet back on the user and destroy him. After a ﬁerce
interchange with arrows, Srutayudha ﬂung his mace with deadly accuracy at
Arjuna’s chest, and once more the Lord saved him by changing the
direction of the chariot so that the mace fell squarely on his own chest. As
expected, it bounced back and killed its owner. Slowly, Arjuna was
beginning to realize that he owed his life, every moment, not to his own
skill but to the Lord’s grace alone.
The horses were tiring and the Lord, with his usual consideration for all
his creatures, told Arjuna that they had to be rested before proceeding
further. Arjuna agreed to ﬁght on foot while the horses rested. Then Krishna
said, “But Arjuna, they need to quench their thirst, and there is no water in
sight.” Arjuna smilingly took up his bow, and invoking Varuna, god of
waters, he shot an arrow into the ground. Water gushed out and formed a
pool. The Lord released the tired animals from the chariot and led them to
the water. Gently, he pulled out the arrows from their ﬂanks and caressed
them with a bewitching smile on his face. Without showing any signs of
hurry, he spoke gently to them and made them relax with his loving touch.
In the meantime, the Kaurava troops were harassing Arjuna, who kept them
at bay with ease, as his son Abhimanyu had done the previous day. Calmly,
the Lord harnessed the refreshed horses back to the chariot, and he and
Arjuna cleaved their way through the Kaurava army, weaving in and out of
the phalanxes. Subduing the army on either side, they sped forward like a
forest conﬂagration.
As sunset was nearing, Arjuna fought with the fury of a man determined
to avenge the death of his beloved son, but still they had not discovered
their quarry. The red disc of the sun began to slip fast into the western
horizon, and once more the Lord intervened to save the life of his beloved
devotee. Holding aloft his divine weapon, the Sudarshana, he masked the
sun so that the Kauravas thought that it had set, and J ayadratha crept from
his hideout like a fox from its lair. Arjuna felt desperate, and Krishna now
expressed a wish to hear the twang of the Gandiva for the last time. Arjuna
was past caring for anything and did as he was told. As the twang of the
Gandiva reverberated in the air, striking terror into J ayadratha’s heart, the
Lord removed the Sudarshana, and to the amazement of all, the setting sun
appeared on the western horizon in a positive blaze of glory. Krishna
galvanized Arjuna into action by shouting to him, “Look, Arjuna! There is
the sun! It has not set, and there stands the killer of your son, creeping out
of his lair in the dark, like a jackal!”
Arjuna was already preparing himself to jump into the ﬁre, but the Lord’s
words made him spring into action. Using the Pasupata with deadly effect,
he neatly severed J ayadrata’s head from his body, but Krishna knew that the
danger was not yet over. J ayadratha’s father had obtained another boon—
that whoever felled his son’s head to the ground would perish. The father
was sitting near the banks of the Lake Syamantapanchaka, close to
Kurukshetra, and quick as a thought, Krishna told Arjuna to keep shooting
arrows so that J ayadratha’s head would be relayed to his father’s lap. The
gruesome object dropped with a thud into the old man’s lap as he was
meditating at the lake side. Instinctively, he threw it to the ground, and his
own head broke into fragments according to his own wish.
Once again, Arjuna’s life had been saved by the Lord, and all the brothers
fell at his feet. As usual, he disclaimed all credit. “A noble man’s anger is
the most potent weapon,” he said. “The gods will not sit idly and watch the
good suffer, even though they may give boons to the wicked.”
The negative vibrations aroused by the death of Abhimanyu were so great
that the rules of dharmic warfare were waived aside and ﬁghting continued
into the night with the aid of torches. Gatotkacha now resorted to the use of
his magic arts, for the opposite side was also using these tactics. He caused
havoc in the Kaurava army. Being half a rakshasa, his strength increased
with the falling of night. Arjuna was itching to come to grips with Karna,
but Krishna kept detaining him, for the time had not yet come. Karna was
busy trying to restrain Gatotkacha, who brushed aside his weapons as if
they were mere toys. A vast portion of the Kaurava army had been
annihilated, and Duryodhana begged Karna to kill Gatotkacha at all costs.
Karna was in a dilemma, for only two of his weapons, the Shakti and the
Nagastra, were capable of killing Gatotkacha, and he had been reserving
both for Arjuna, since he was allowed to use them only once. Reluctantly, at
Duryodhana’s repeated pleas, he discharged Indra’s weapon, the Shakti, up
into the sky, from which vantage point Gatotkacha was ﬁghting. It pierced
through the veil of illusion woven by the rakshasa hero and brought him
down lifeless. But even in death, Bhima’s son proved to be formidable, for
he expanded his mighty form and crushed thousands of Kaurava soldiers as
he fell. The Pandavas were plunged in grief, but Krishna consoled them by
saying that Arjuna’s life had been partly saved, since the Shakti could no
longer be used against him. This was the reason why the Lord had not
allowed Arjuna to come to grips with Karna.
The ﬁfteenth day dawned, and once more Duryodhana accused Drona of
partiality for the Pandavas. Drona had been destroying the enemy troops
without compassion, throwing overboard all the codes of warfare that had
been agreed upon. This unjust accusation, as well as his own indiscriminate
slaughter of innocents, which was quite against his swadharma as a
Brahmin, made him feel thoroughly disgusted with life. Yet he fought on
and at last killed his childhood enemy, Drupada. But this victory brought no
joy to him. All the scenes of his boyhood spent with his friend ﬂooded his
mind, and he felt a bitter disgust at the strange role that fate had forced upon
him. Drishtadyumna rushed to avenge his father’s death, but Drona routed
him easily. Now Arjuna proceeded to engage the aged preceptor, but he
proved to be invincible, for on that day he was ﬁghting with utter disregard
for his own life and none could approach him. The Lord knew what was
passing through Drona’s mind, how he was disgusted with life and ready to
leave this world. He also knew that Drona could never be killed unless he
laid down his weapons. This he would never do unless they could manage
to convince him of the death of his son, Asvattama. He told Bhima to go
and kill an elephant called Asvattama and prepared Yudhishtira as to what
he should say if Drona questioned him. Yudhishtira refused to tell a lie and
had to be cajoled into saying the literal truth. Bhima returned and roared
loudly so that Drona could hear, “I have killed Asvattama!”
Drona, however, did not trust Bhima and turned to Yudhishtira for
conﬁrmation. With great reluctance, Yudhishtira mumbled, “Yes, Bhima has
killed Asvattama, the elephant.”
However, the sound of the Lord’s conch drowned the last two words, so
that Drona had to infer that his son was dead. He was already disgusted
with life, and he started to behold celestial beings in the sky beckoning him
to leave his mortal body. Then did the great Dronacharya lay down his arms
and sit in meditation in his chariot. Drishtadyumna, who had been born to
kill him, rushed forward and cut off his head, despite the horriﬁed
exclamations of the others.
A temporary truce was now declared to lament over their fallen preceptor.
When Asvattama heard of his father’s death, he was so infuriated that he
discharged the deadly Narayanastra against the Pandavas. This had been
given to him by his father when he was a boy, since he had been jealous of
his father’s partiality for Arjuna and had begged him to give him some
weapon not possessed by his disciple. It was a devastating weapon, and
Drona had warned him that it should be used only in the case of dire
necessity and that it could not be used twice. The astra now came in the
form of thousands of small missiles, threatening to engulf and destroy the
entire Pandava clan. Krishna ordered everyone to throw down their
weapons and prostrate in submission before the oncoming missile. Bhima
alone stood up deﬁantly, and it zoomed toward him. Krishna pushed him
down in the nick of the time and stood before him, and once again the astra
proved to be helpless against the Lord. Asvattama was furious with
everything and everyone, including his father, who he thought had cheated
him. J ust then the sage Vyasa appeared and told him, “Your father did not
cheat you, O Asvattama! He gave you the Narayanastra, which is potent
with the power of the Lord Narayana, and you have been foolish enough to
use it against those who are being protected by Krishna, who is none other
than Lord Narayana.”
Asvattama realized his mistake. He and Kripa now begged Duryodhana to
stop the senseless slaughter, but the latter was now sure of a miraculous
victory, for Karna had been installed as general of the Kaurava forces.
Duryodhana ordered the Yadava army, the Narayana sena, to ﬁght with
Arjuna. Many of Krishna’s own sons were in the army, and Arjuna was
most reluctant to ﬁght them, but Krishna, the perfect karma yogi,
encouraged Arjuna to perform his duty unﬂinchingly. He was forced to ﬁght
and kill many of the Lord’s sons, while he charioted him without a tremor.
Next, Karna tried to grapple with Arjuna but had to turn away defeated.
He went to Duryodhana and told him that he could kill Arjuna only if he
had a charioteer of Krishna’s caliber and asked him to request Shalya to
take up this role. Shalya was not too happy to drive the chariot of someone
low born like Karna, but consented when Duryodhana pointed out the
Lord’s example. Since Shalya was noted for his acid tongue, Duryodhana
warned Karna to exercise great control over his temper and not to retaliate,
whatever Shalya might say.
On the way to battle the next day, Shalya was determined to provoke and
humiliate Karna, and they had a wordy battle that very nearly broke up the
union. Strangely enough, a similar scene was being enacted in Arjuna’s
chariot, with Krishna provoking him with such statements as, “Karna is
invincible in a fair ﬁght. You will need all your wits to defeat him.”
But while Krishna’s provocative words only served to strengthen Arjuna’s
determination to slay Karna at all costs, Shalya’s served to inﬂame Karna so
that he forgot the promise made to Duryodhana and retaliated, word for
word.
Both Nakula and Yudhishtira were defeated by Karna. He refused to kill
them since he had promised his mother to kill none of his brothers but
Arjuna. Karna, in turn, was hurt so badly by Bhima that he fainted, but
Bhima desisted from killing him, for he was reserved for Arjuna. Now
Sahadeva accosted him, but Karna let him go and pushed forward, until at
last the two great protagonists came face-to-face. A ﬁerce battle ensued in
which Karna appeared to be getting the upper hand. When Krishna asked
Arjuna what the matter was and why he was ﬁghting in such a half-hearted
manner, he replied, “I do not see Karna in front of me, but only my brother,
Yudhishtira. I do not know what the matter is, but I cannot ﬁght with him
now. Please take me away from here!”
So Krishna broke through the network of arrows made by Karna and took
Arjuna to Yudhishtira’s tent, where the latter was lying in severe pain from
wounds inﬂicted by Karna. Even he reprimanded Arjuna mildly for shirking
his duty, and Arjuna, for once, became furious with his brother.
On the seventeenth day of the battle, Karna prepared his weapons
carefully and bade a loving farewell to Duryodhana, for he knew that the
day of reckoning had come. In the meantime, Bhima came faceto-face with
Dussasana. The vivid scene of the disrobing of Draupadi ﬂashed across his
mind so that he threw away the mace that was in his hand and caught hold
of Dussasana’s hair. Using his bare hands and feet, he broke his right arm
and wrenched it from its socket—the arm that had dragged Draupadi by her
beauteous hair through the streets of Hastinapura into the open assembly of
the Kurus, the arm that had done its best to tear her clothes away. With a
diabolic cry, Bhima threw Dussasana down, jumped on his chest, tore open
his ribs with his bare hands, scooped out his heart, and proceeded to make
good his oath of drinking his blood. Krishna stopped him in time and told
him to spit it out, for he had already fulﬁlled his oath. Though he was still
in a violent mood, Bhima complied, while the rest watched, horriﬁed. Karna
was thoroughly demoralized by this macabre scene, for he also remembered
that shameful incident of Draupadi’s disrobing, his own comments, and the
dreadful oaths taken on that day by the helpless Pandavas. Turning around,
he beheld his only surviving son being killed by Arjuna after a brief duel.
Brushing away his tears, he girded himself for the ﬁnal battle and turned
to face Arjuna. Both of them realized that it would be a ﬁght to the ﬁnish.
As they fought on, using more and more potent weapons and tactics, they
were each mentally applauding the other for his skill! The rest had stopped
ﬁghting and stood watching the duel between these two, who had sworn to
kill each other. The charioteers were maneuvering with great skill and care.
Finally Karna, realizing that all his best efforts were in vain, decided that
the Nagastra was the only weapon that could ﬁnish off Arjuna. Fixing it on
his bow, he took careful aim at Arjuna’s throat. The arrow, in the shape of a
hissing cobra with mouth and fangs wide open, darted toward its mark like
lightning. For the ﬁrst time in his life, Arjuna, the great hero, lost his nerve
and begged Krishna to save him. The Lord, who had saved him many times
all through his life without being asked, now smiled comfortingly and
effortlessly pressed the chariot down twelve inches into the mud. The
Nagastra, which had been aimed at Arjuna’s throat, just missed his head and
carried away his helmet.
Karna now decided to resort to the Brahmastra, the most powerful
missile, the mantra for which he had learned from his preceptor,
Parasurama. To his dismay, he found that he could not remember a single
word of the mantra, due to his guru’s curse. To make matters worse, his
own chariot had also sunk into the mud and would not move. Shalya
refused to get down to dislodge the wheel. Karna rebuked him for deserting
him. At this, Shalya angrily ﬂung down his whip, threw the reins into his
face, and left him to his fate. Karna was forced to jump out of his chariot
and try to lift the wheel out of the quagmire, calling to Arjuna to stop the
ﬁght for a while. The latter was willing to do so, but Krishna, in his role as
Karmaphaladaatta (he who gives the fruits of actions), thundered at him,
“Where, O Karna, was your talk of fair play when you and the Kauravas
surrounded the boy Abhimanyu and slaughtered him?”
Karna remembered his own part in that dreadful episode and knew that
the Lord spoke the truth. With a sigh, he remounted and continued to ﬁght
from his stationary chariot, but though Arjuna wounded him severely, he
was unable to kill him. Krishna explained to Arjuna that Karna could not be
killed until his entire stock of merit was exhausted. Taking on the form of a
mendicant, the Lord approached Karna for alms, but he had nothing to give
him, so the Lord said, “I have come to seek your punya, or spiritual merit. I
shall be content with that.” Karna knew it was another test for him, so he
smiled and unhesitatingly replied, “Gladly will I give you all the merit I
have accumulated, accumulating, and might accumulate in the future, if it
will satisfy you.”
Thus by surrendering even his spiritual merit to the Lord, who is the giver
of all merit, Karna achieved immortality. But the Lord was not done with
him as yet. He had come to test him to the utmost, and he now said, “A gift
to a Brahmin should be solemnized with an oblation of water.”
Karna said, “I’m unable to ﬁnd some water even to quench my thirst, but
this I can do if it will satisfy you.” So saying, he drew out an arrow
embedded in his body and solemnized the gift with a spurt of blood. As he
collapsed from loss of blood, the beggar gently supported him against the
chariot wheel.
Feeling drops of water falling on him, Karna wearily opened his eyes and
was thrilled to behold the glorious vision of the Lord, upholding him with
one arm and gazing at him with lotus eyes overﬂowing with compassion,
from which a few drops had splashed on him.
“Your name and fame will live forever, O Karna!” the Lord said. “You
have amply atoned for all your sins. Now ask for any boon, and I shall grant
it to you.”
Karna whispered, “What terrible sins have I committed against my
brothers and sister-in-law! My only comfort is that I feel that I have paid
my debt of gratitude to Duryodhana, and I have never failed to give to
anyone whatever has been asked of me. If I have to take another birth, grant
me the boon that once again I will never be able to deny anything to
anyone.”
The Lord smiled gently and said, “Your sins are insigniﬁcant when
compared to the merit accrued by your charity and magnanimity. Your
present suffering is due to those sins, but fear not, Karna. By your ﬁnal act
of surrendering even your merit to me, I myself shall take on the burden of
your sins and will relieve you from your physical pain.” So saying, he
gently released Karna and went back to Arjuna and told him to shoot the
fatal arrow. Arjuna was reluctant to shoot at a fallen enemy but took it as a
command of God and discharged the Ancharika missile. Thus fell the
mighty hero Karna. Though his sins were many, yet his heart was so large
that one remembers him only for his charity and magnanimity and not for
his crimes. A heavenly voice now proclaimed that Karna was not a low
born but the son of Kunti and the brother of the Pandavas. Hearing this,
Kunti came to the battleﬁeld where lay the fallen hero in the mud and grime
and gore of Kurukshetra. Taking her dead son on her lap, she lamented long
and loud over him as she had promised she would do and announced to all
that he was her ﬁrstborn. The Pandavas, however, were not there to hear
this.
Duryodhana rushed to the scene. If there was anyone in the world that he
was genuinely fond of, it was Karna. When he realized that Karna had
already known his parentage and had fought against his brothers, only out
of gratitude to him, he was inconsolable. Arjuna now realized why he had
found a striking resemblance between Karna and his eldest brother and felt
terrible at having killed him. Karna’s wife Kanchanamala also came to the
scene and threw herself on his body and mourned for him. All of them
eventually turned to Krishna, for they felt that he had known everything and
had not disclosed it at the proper time. They forgot the fact that God has no
partiality for persons and that he only saw to it that each one got his just
deserts.
The Lord said, “Karna himself requested me not to reveal his secret until
he had died. He sacriﬁced himself out of gratitude to Duryodhana. I am
fully prepared to bear the responsibility of his death, just as I am prepared
to assure you that he will never be born again. On two previous occasions I
had given you hints about his identity, but you were not prepared to
understand. None of you cared to inquire when Draupadi confessed to
having a sixth person in her mind, nor when Arjuna retreated, thinking he
saw Yudhishtira in him.”
Thus ended the seventeenth day of the battle. The eighteenth day dawned
murky and gloomy, as if the weather gods themselves bemoaned the birth of
such a day. The end was a forgone conclusion, but Duryodhana still hoped
for a miracle. After consulting Asvattama, he chose Shalya as the new
commander. As only a few heroes remained, they decided to avoid
individual combats. Shalya now fought with an inspiration born of despair.
Krishna suggested that Yudhishtira was the right person to ﬁght with him.
Yudhishtira amazed everyone with his dexterity with the javelin. After a
long and well-matched battle, Yudhishtira hurled his javelin, after invoking
the Lord’s name, and it found its mark in Shalya’s chest. The Lord
explained that it was only the power of Yudhishtira’s accumulated dharma
that had vanquished Shalya. The Kaurava army was in a shambles by now
and thoroughly demoralized. Duryodhana tried to rally them and sent his
remaining brothers to ﬁght with Bhima, who promptly ﬁnished them off.
Shakuni’s son, Uluka, was now singled out by Nakula, who fulﬁlled his
oath by killing him under the very eyes of his father. Now it was Sahadeva’s
turn to make good his oath to kill the archvillain of the Mahabharata—
Shakuni, prince of Gandhara. He cut off his arms and left him to die in
mortal agony.
The Pandavas now set out to exterminate the remnants of the opposing
army. At the end of the morning, there were only four Kaura chiefs left,
Duryodhana, Asvattama, Kripa, and Kritavarma, general of the Yadava
forces. Seeing the bloody ﬁeld of his own making, spattered with the blood
and heads of his own brothers and loved ones, the Kuru prince wept like a
child. Forlorn and defeated, he decided to beat a hasty retreat and went to
Dvaipayana Lake to cool himself. The other three followed him. Some
hunters happened to hear their conversation by the lake and reported the
matter to the Pandavas, who had been searching for their cousin. They
hurried to the lake where Duryodhana, like a coward, had hidden himself in
the water, breathing through a reed. The other three had also hidden
themselves elsewhere. Seeing the bubbles in the water, the Pandavas
discovered Duryodhana’s hiding place and taunted him, telling him to come
out and face his end like a hero. At this, Duryodhana emerged and
magnanimously offered his kingdom to Yudhishtira. The Pandavas laughed
at this generous offer from the defeated king and told him, as once before
he had told Yudhishtira, that if he wanted to retain his kingdom, he would
have to ﬁght for it.
Then Yudhishtira, in his usual quixotic fashion that sometimes bordered
on foolishness, offered to give over the entire fortunes of the war to the
winner of a duel between Duryodhana and one of his brothers, quite
forgetting the fact that Bhima had sworn to kill him. In his anxiety to be fair
at all costs, he even told Duryodhana that he could choose one among them
to ﬁght with. The rest of the brothers were aghast at this astounding offer
but kept quiet, even though they knew that this might well result in the
collapse of all their hopes. But the cold war between Duryodhana and
Bhima had continued too long for the former to even contemplate ﬁghting
with any of the others. His blood boiled when he thought of how Bhima had
killed all his brothers, and the gory scene of the killing of Dussasana, his
favorite brother, was fresh in his mind. His eyes became bloodshot, and he
looked scornfully at Yudhishtira, as if despising him for his weakness in
having made such an offer. Then he turned his baleful look on Bhima, and
the two glared at each other. They had many a score to settle, and they both
knew that the moment of reckoning had come. They had been looking
forward to it.
They decided to ﬁght this decisive battle on the banks of
Syamantapanchaka Lake. Silently, the seven of them marched toward the
spot. Bhima took off his armor as Duryodhana had none. J ust as the battle
was about to commence, Balarama returned from his pilgrimage, in time to
witness the mighty battle between his two disciples. He warned them to
observe the rules of fair play that he had taught them. The others made a
circle around the two titans, who were ready to settle their lifelong feud
once and for all. They were well matched. Bhima’s blows were more
powerful, but Duryodhana’s body was like adamant as a result of his
mother’s look. The only time Gandhari had taken off the scarf around her
eyes had been to instill strength into her eldest child when he had
approached her and begged her to help him. She had told him to come to
her naked, and she would infuse the strength of a hundred elephants into
him by the mere power of her gaze. But he had insisted on wearing a
loincloth, and thus his thighs alone had not received the beneﬁt of her
powerful rays.
Duryodhana had been practicing on an iron efﬁgy of Bhima for many
years, preparing himself for this very day, so he was well acquainted with
the length and girth of his opponent’s body. For some time, they grappled
on without either of them being able to get the upper hand. At last,
Duryodhana, selﬁsh to the last, asked Bhima for his vulnerable spot. The
latter truthfully pointed to his head and was immediately smitten down.
Bhima fell like a log, but somehow he made a tremendous recovery just as
Duryodhana pounced on his inert body. When he asked Duryodhana for his
weak point, the latter pointed untruthfully at his own head. Bhima pounded
on it with little effect, for Duryodhana’s head was like iron. Actually, his
weak point was his thighs, and Bhima had sworn to smash them on that
fatal day when Draupadi was humiliated in public. On that day, Duryodhana
had bared his thigh to her, slapped it, and beckoned to her with vulgar
gestures. In the heat of the ﬁght and perhaps due to the blow on his head,
Bhima had forgotten his oath.
The Lord, as usual, came to the rescue and reminded him of this by
slapping his own thighs. Bhima saw this, and the whole humiliating scene
ﬂashed before his eyes. Draupadi’s piteous look of appeal and his utter
helplessness then ﬁlled him with fury now. His eyes became bloodshot, and
like an infuriated bull he charged at his tormentor. He should have smashed
those thighs on that very day, but he had not been able to do so. Now,
nothing could stop him, not even the thought that he was committing
adharma. Where is the question of dharma or adharma when dealing with
one as low and unrighteous as Duryodhana, who had tried every mean and
foul trick all through his association with the Pandavas to gain his own
way?
Swinging up his mace, he pretended to be aiming another blow at
Duryodhana’s head. As Duryodhana nimbly jumped aside to avoid the
blow, Bhima, summoning all the pent-up feelings of many years, brought
the mace down with tremendous force on his adversary’s thighs and broke
them so that at last the villain fell, mortally wounded. Bhima roared the lion
cry of victory. His anger unabated, he pressed his foot on Duryodhana’s
head, for he said a snake should be stamped on the head, but Yudhishtira
intervened and restrained him. Bhima then knelt at his brother’s feet and
offered him the throne of the Kurus, which had been wrested from him by
such unfair means.
At that moment Balarama, who had been a witness to the battle, rushed at
Bhima with an upraised plow to punish him for his unrighteous act. Krishna
stopped him and asked him gently why he had not thought of restraining
Duryodhana when he had committed so many atrocities against the
Pandavas. Balarama did not say a word and left for Dwaraka, without
waiting for the end. In spite of his agony, Duryodhana now burst out a spurt
of venom against Krishna.
The Lord calmly replied, “Think of the evil and suffering you have
caused, the number of lives that have been lost only because of your refusal
to see reason and listen to me, when I came for peace. All creatures get their
just deserts. The wheel of time runs slowly, but in the end it encompasses
the destruction of all things.”
Leaving Duryodhana to brood over his wrongs, the Pandavas returned to
the enemy camp to take over. When they reached the spot, Krishna ordered
Arjuna to dismount. Soon, to the amazement of everyone, the chariot burst
into ﬂames and was reduced to ashes.
Arjuna turned to Krishna with tears in his eyes. “My Lord,” he said,
“what is this I see? My chariot, which was given to me by Agni when he
burned the Khandava forest, has been burnt before my very eyes. What is
the reason for this?”
The Lord replied, “This chariot has withstood the powerful astras sent by
Drona, Karna, and Asvattama only because I was sitting in it. It should have
been burned up long ago. I have abandoned it now that you have achieved
what you set out to achieve. So it is with everything in this world. Each
thing is created for a purpose. The moment the purpose is achieved, it will
perish. This is so even with men. Each man sets out on this strange journey
called life with a deﬁnite purpose, and once that is served, Earth has no
more need of him, and so he has to quit. This is the case even with me. I
have created myself on this Earth for a special purpose. It is not yet over.
But the moment it is fulﬁlled, I will also die, and so will you and your dear
brothers. But come, do not grieve. Let us be on our next task.” He then
turned to Yudhishtira and congratulated him on his victory in formal terms.
All of them were deathly tired, both physically and mentally, and were
ready to go to their camp and drop down on their beds, but Krishna forbade
them to do so and insisted that it was customary for the victors to sleep
outside. Thus, the ﬁve brothers, together with Satyaki, slept far away from
their own camp, while the Lord himself took on the thankless task of going
to Hastinapura to comfort the parents of the Kauravas.
Sanjaya, who had been narrating the events of the battle to the blind king
Dhritarashtra, had already informed him of the calamities that had
overtaken his son. When Krishna came, Vidura was doing his best to
console the weeping parents. The Lord’s eyes ﬁlled with tears when he saw
the condition of the old parents. He sat beside them and spoke gently and
lovingly to them for a long time. Turning to Gandhari, he said, “Do you
remember that day when I came to Hastinapura on a mission of peace, and
you told Duryodhana, ‘ Where there is righteousness there will be victory’?
Mother, as you have said, so it has come to pass. You must not blame the
Pandavas for this calamity. You know how hard Yudhishtira tried to avert
the war. If only Duryodhana had listened to all the advice everyone tried to
give him, this catastrophe could have been averted. Now it is your duty to
be kind to the children of Pandu. They have suffered so much in life. You
must not turn your eyes in anger toward them.”
Thus the Lord spent some time with them and left only after he had
brought some measure of relief to their grief-stricken hearts. Krishna
hurried back to Kurukshetra accompanied by Sanjaya, who wanted to pay
his last respects to the Kuru king, who was now in mortal agony. Even in
his last hours, he was burning with thoughts of revenge. He felt no remorse
for all he had done. After Sanjaya left, the other three, Asvattama, Kripa,
and Kritavarma, went to him, and in order to ease his pain a little, they
offered to make a last attempt to annihilate the Pandavas. Duryodhana was
delighted, made Asvattama their leader, and sent them off to do their worst.
The shades of night had fallen by now, and as they rested under a tree,
Asvattama noticed an owl silently coming and killing the baby crows while
the birds were sleeping. A diabolical plan for revenge began to take shape
in his maddened brain. He woke up the other two and detailed the plan to
them. They refused to have anything to do with it, but Asvattama was
determined and managed to persuade them to accompany him. The three
planned a cold-blooded massacre of the sleeping Pandavas and their army.
In the small hours of the night, the devilish trio silently slipped into the
Pandava camp. Even the sentries were sleeping since the war was
supposedly over. No one dreamed of such a horrifying sequel except
perhaps the Lord himself, and he, for some reason known only to the
cosmic mind, refrained from saving any except the Pandavas. Perhaps the
time had come for the chariot of their bodies to perish, as Arjuna’s chariot
had perished.
Leaving Kripa and Kritavarma to guard the exits and kill anyone who
tried to escape, Asvattama slipped, as silently as an owl, into each of the
tents to accomplish his hateful task and show his loyalty and love for
Duryodhana. First he entered Drishtadyumna’s tent, and despite his pleas to
be killed quickly with a sword, he strangled him to death. Then he kicked
Shikandin violently until he died. He then mercilessly chopped off the
heads of the ﬁve sleeping sons of the Pandavas by Draupadi. To prevent any
one from escaping, Kripa set ﬁre to all the tents.
There was complete pandemonium, and the survivors rushed to the exits
only to be mowed down by the three devils guarding the exits. Intoxicated
with the blood oozing from his hands, Asvattama took the ﬁve heads of
what he thought to be the Pandavas and presented them to the dying
Duryodhana so that he could die in peace. The latter lovingly took them into
his hands, gloated over them, and crushed them one by one with his dying
hands. Suddenly he realized that Bhima’s hard head could never be crushed
so easily. He asked for a torch to be brought, and in the ﬂickering light, he
realized bitterly that fate had snatched victory from beneath his nose once
again. His gratitude now gave way to anger, and he berated Asvattama with
a stream of invective. The latter was already half demented, and at this
barrage of abuse, he left in fury, not knowing what he should do.
At last, shaking with pain, rage, and frustration, Duryodhana, whose
villainy has no parallel, gave up his life, unattended, unmourned, and alone,
except for the silent vultures that were circling him in the night sky.
News of the midnight massacre was taken to the Pandavas by
Drishtadyumna’s mortally wounded charioteer. Their grief at their hollow
victory can be imagined. As the sun rose on the nineteenth morning, the
scene was one of utter desolation and despair. Taking Panchali with them,
the Pandavas went to examine the horriﬁc scene. Seeing the mangled bodies
of their children, they fainted. Draupadi was the ﬁrst to recover, and she
appealed to Bhima to wreak vengeance on the villain, Asvattama. He
rushed off with Nakula as his charioteer. Krishna followed with Arjuna, for
he well knew the power of Asvattama’s Brahmasirastra, which he would not
hesitate to use if his own life was jeopardized.
Bhima found him hiding on the banks of the river. The last shreds of his
sanity seemed to have left him. Not content with the massacre of innocent
men and children for the sake of a man who had no gratitude to him and
whom he knew to be a devil incarnate, Asvattama, the son of the great
Dronacharya, who had already tarnished his caste and lineage by his
actions, now condemned himself to a dreadful hell by taking up a blade of
grass, invoking the Brahmasirastra, and hurling it at Bhima and Arjuna with
these words, “May the world be rid of the line of the Pandavas!”
The Brahmasirastra was the most potent missile of that age, and none of
them had used it so far, since its consequences were far-reaching and
devastating. Usually it was not entrusted to one like Asvattama, who was
morally incompetent to use it.
From the blade of grass there sprang a terrible ﬂame that threatened to
engulf the whole world. Krishna instructed Arjuna to counter it with his
own Brahmasirastra. The opposing missiles ﬂashed through the air. Had
they collided, there would have been universal destruction, but Vyasa and
the celestial sage Narada came at the opportune moment and stopped the
ﬁery onslaught by the power of their tapasya. Krishna asked Arjuna to
recall his astra, and he obeyed, but Asvattama, having lost his powers by
his inhuman acts, was unable to recall the astra, which recoiled on him and
would have destroyed him. He ran to the sages and begged them to save
him. They did so out of consideration for his father and because they knew
that it was too easy a death for him. Arjuna now bound the felon hand and
foot and took him to Draupadi.
Krishna wanted to test her and said, “You may now pronounce the death
sentence. How would you like him killed?”
But when the Lord chose to test his devotees, he generally gave them the
strength to excel in the test, and Draupadi, to her great glory, replied, “He is
the cold-blooded murderer of my ﬁve sons as well as of my beloved
brothers and so deserves the worst of deaths. But when I remember that he
is the son of my husband’s guru and that his mother, Kripi, is still alive, I do
not feel like making another woman experience the pain that I am
experiencing now. Moreover, his death will not bring to life my own sons. I
do not want him killed.”
The Lord was eminently pleased with her answer and said, “Instead of
cutting off his head, we can take off his tuft of hair as well as the crest jewel
adorning it. This is tantamount to death for a hero.”
Draupadi agreed, and Bhima cut off Asvattama’s hair in ﬁve places and
took off his precious crest jewel, which had guarded him against all
weapons, diseases, and hunger. But to crush a cobra without killing it is
always unwise, and the unrepentant villain crept away to nurse his
grievance and make further plans. Devoid of mercy and completely
deranged, he made a last, desperate attempt to exterminate the line of the
Pandavas, for he realized that he could never kill the Pandavas themselves,
who were divinely protected. Taking up another blade of grass, he
discharged it with the same potent mantra and directed it against any babies
in the wombs of the Pandava wives, so that the line would become extinct.
Uttara, the wife of Abhimanyu, was the only widow carrying a child in her
womb, and the missile came rushing at her. Her mother-in-law Subhadra,
Lord Krishna’s sister, took her to him and begged him to protect her. The
Lord instantly dispatched his discus to counter the attack and saved her. He
then went after the terriﬁed Asvattama, who was ﬂeeing for his life.
Catching up with him, Krishna proceeded to punish him. The latter pleaded
for death, but death at the hands of the Lord was too good for such a wretch.
In dire tones, the Lord pronounced these fateful words, “May you live for
thousands of years condemned to wander over the world like a leper,
shunned by all, afﬂicted with all sorts of diseases, your name itself a bane to
all!”
Hearing this dreadful pronouncement, Asvattama ﬂed from the scene to
wander over the world forever.
I  am convinced that prosperity, victory, glory, and righteousness
shall reign wherever Krishna, the master yogi, and Arjuna, the
wielder of the bow, stand united.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Bhishmamuktipradayakaya Namaha!
2 8
T he Advice of  Bhishma
Bhaktyaeshya mano yasmin, vacha yannama keertayan,
Tyajan kalebaram yogi, muchyate kamakarmabhi,
Sa Devadevo Bhagavan prateekshatham kalebaram, yavathitam
hinomyaham,
Prasannahasarunalochanollasanmukambhujo
dhyanapadaschaturbhujam.
Bhishma, on his deathbed, to Yudhishtira: “By concentrating one’s
mind on Krishna with intense devotion and by reciting whose
names and glories with one’s lips, a dying aspirant is liberated from
the bondage of desire and duty, may Bhagavan Krishna, with his
radiant face beautiﬁed by his benevolent smile and lotus-petal eyes,
who is generally realized only in the heart through meditation,
remain before my physical eyes until life leaves my body.”
The sun that rose over the battleﬁeld of Kurukshetra the day after the war
was pale and insipid, as if loath to light up such a scene of utter desolation
and despair. Vultures and carrion birds screeched and circled over the ﬁeld
before falling on the carcasses of men and horses below. Though the
Pandavas stood uninjured and victorious, yet around them lay the death of
all their hopes. They had won an empire at the cost of their sons. The throne
of the Kurus was theirs, but their hearts and homes were empty. Scattered
on the bloody ﬁeld of Kurukshetra lay the ﬂower of Aryan knighthood,
silent forever. Those knights, who had marched to battle with ﬂying ﬂags,
prancing steeds, gaily bedecked chariots, and conchs and trumpets blasting
just a month ago, now lay on the cold, cold earth, a prey to kites, vultures,
jackals, and wolves. In the distance was seen the woe-stricken procession of
the royal women of the Kurus coming to mourn their dead, as predicted by
Krishna to Draupadi. Their hair was loose, their clothes disheveled, and
their faces smeared with collyrium from the tears that were streaming down
while they beat their breasts in anguish. The Pandavas trembled when they
gazed on them, for they, whose forms had never been seen beyond the four
walls of their palaces, now walked abroad, their faces bared in utter
indifference to the public eye, as Draupadi had once been dragged through
the streets of Hastinapura. The hundred sons of Dhritarashtra all lay dead,
and their widows came mourning and weeping, as Draupadi had once wept,
when their husbands had so callously dragged her, the greatest of them all,
into the court of the Kurus, fourteen years ago, in the full ﬂower of her
youth and beauty. There had been none to shed a tear for her at that time,
but today the Pandavas wept when they saw this pathetic procession, for the
milk of human kindness still ﬂowed in them, and they mourned as deeply as
the women for the deaths for which they had been instrumental.
Unable to witness this sight any longer, they left with Krishna for
Hastinapura to meet the bereaved parents, for because of their age and
blindness they had not come to the battleﬁeld. Yudhishtira fell like a log at
Dhritarashtra’s feet and was embraced by him. It was Bhima’s turn next,
and the blind king’s rage against him was so great that he would have
crushed him to death had not Lord Krishna, with great presence of mind,
thrust the iron image of Bhima into his arms. The image was one on which
Duryodhana had been practicing, and the king’s anger was so great that the
iron image shattered like glass with the force of his hug. Though the entire
battle was his own fault, he could not hide his chagrin at the fate of his sons.
Had he made a push to curb Duryodhana’s temper and direct him in the path
of righteousness from childhood, all this might never have taken place, as
Krishna pointed out to him. He also told him that at least now he should
behave like a father to the Pandavas.
Next they turned to Gandhari. From the beginning, she had known that
Kurukshetra would see the end of her household. She also knew that it was
her husband’s weakness coupled with his greed that had led to this disaster.
But the fact that her husband was being crushed under the doom he had
brought upon himself made her burn with rage and sorrow. She had
blindfolded herself, of her own free will, from the day she had been brought
to this palace as a beautiful young bride, denying herself the light of the day
so as not to enjoy the world that could not be seen by her lord. Such was her
ﬁdelity and such the power of her wrath that she feared to gaze at the face
of the Pandavas in case the ﬁre of her anger should burn them even through
the fold of the cloth, which she tied around her eyes. As Yudhishtira
approached to seek her blessing, she bent her eyes down so that her
blindfolded gaze fell upon his foot, and it was scorched at that very spot.
Seeing this, Bhima and Arjuna quailed and hid behind Krishna, and
Gandhari’s anger passed over their heads.
The Pandavas now met their mother Kunti after fourteen years. Kunti
caressed them and ran loving ﬁngers over their wounds. Taking Draupadi in
her arms, she did her best to comfort her. At last, all of them followed the
king and Gandhari to the battleﬁeld, since they insisted on going. Gandhari
spoke to Draupadi, “Look at me, O Daughter, and comfort yourself. Vidura
prophesied this long ago, and Krishna gave due warning when he came as
ambassador. My dear child, I have lost all my sons, as you have. Who is to
comfort whom? The destruction of the entire race is due to me.”
They walked toward the battleﬁeld. Gandhari could see it all in her mind’s
eye. Turning to Krishna, she looked directly at him, for she knew him to be
indestructible. She showed him the dead forms of her sons and the women
who were mourning for them. Then, going to the spot where Duryodhana
lay, she fell down in a faint. Krishna stood by her side and said nothing. She
saw all the scenes. She saw Uttara weeping over her dead husband,
Abhimanyu. They had been married but six months. Seeing all this,
Gandhari’s anger ﬂared up once again, but this time it was directed at the
Lord.
“Behold, O lotus-eyed one!” she said. “Behold the daughters of my
house, widowed and bereft, with locks unbound and eyes swollen with
weeping! Don’t you hear their piteous laments, brooding over the dead
bodies of the heroes? Behold them seeking for the faces of their loved ones
on the ﬁeld of Kurukshetra. They search for their husbands, fathers, sons,
and brothers. The whole ﬁeld is covered with these childless mothers and
widowed wives. Where are they now, my splendid sons who were like
burning meteors? The battleﬁeld is scattered with their costly gems and
golden armor, their splendid ornaments and diadems. The weapons handled
by those heroic hands lie in confusion on the ﬁeld, never to be dispatched
again upon their dreadful errands. Beholding these pitiful images in my
mind, O Krishna, my whole body is aﬁre with grief. The world seems
empty and desolate. I feel as if the elements themselves have been
destroyed. Like the darkened coals of a dead ﬁre lie the heroes who took
part in this mighty battle. They, who had slept cradled on the soft bosoms of
their wives, now sleep on the cold, hard breast of the earth. J ackals alone
are there to chant their glory, in lieu of bards. The wailing of the women
mingles with the howl of hungry beasts. What was that destiny, O Krishna,
that pursued my sons from the time they were born? Whence came this
curse on the house of the Kurus? Why does my heart not break into a
thousand fragments at these dreadful happenings? What sin have I and these
weeping daughters of mine committed that such a disaster should have
befallen us?”
Hearing the sobs of Kunti and Draupadi, it suddenly ﬂashed upon her that
the whole battle was like a play in which the armies had destroyed each
other. She also realized that the sole director and producer of the drama was
standing beside her. Turning to him, she addressed him in prophetic tones.
From the depths of her sorrow came the courage to curse the Lord himself.
“Two armies, O J anardana, have perished on this ﬁeld. Where were you
while they thus put an end to each other? Were you blind, or had you
deliberately blindfolded yourself? Why did you allow this calamity to befall
the house of the Kurus? I know well that you could have prevented it, if you
had so wished. Why did you hold your hand, O slayer of Kamsa? By the
power of my great chastity and ﬁdelity, I pronounce this curse upon you and
your race: You shall become the slayer of your own kinsmen, thirty-six
years from now. After having brought about the destruction of your sons
and kinsmen, you yourself shall perish alone, in the wilderness, as my son
Duryodhana did, lying alone and helpless beside the lake, even though he
was the king of the Kurus. The women of your race, deprived of their sons,
husbands, and friends, shall weep and wail in their bereavement, as do the
wives of the Kauravas today!”
As her voice died away in sobs, the Lord looked tenderly at her and said,
“Blessed are you, O Mother, for you have aided me in the completion of my
task. My people, the Yadavas, are incapable of defeat, and therefore they
have to die by my own hands. Behold, O Mother! With folded hands, I
gladly accept your curse!”
Then the holy one bent down to the aged queen, who had sunk down in
sorrow, and lifted her up gently. “Arise, O Gandhari!” he said. “Think of the
wrongs inﬂicted on the virtuous Pandavas by your sons over the years,
which they have borne so patiently. At that time, it was you who was
indifferent, not I, and now you blame me for indifference. The law of
karma, though inexorable, is also just. He who sows the wind has perforce
to reap the whirlwind. Your sons brought about their fate by their own
actions, as did the Pandavas. All must inevitably be mown down by time—
the wielder of the scythe. It is the Lord’s power as time that has contrived
the end of your sons, as well as the sons of the Pandavas. Set not your heart
on grief, O Q ueen! By indulging in sorrow one increases it twofold. The
cow brings forth offspring for the bearing of burdens, the Brahmin woman
bears children for the practice of austerities, the laboring woman adds to the
ranks of the workers;  but the Kshatriya woman bears sons who are destined
to die on the battleﬁeld. Why then do you grieve?”
The queen listened in silence to his words. Only too well did she realize
their truth. With her inner vision clariﬁed by her great sorrow, she looked at
the world and found it all to be unreal. There was nothing further to be said.
Then she and Dhritarashtra, together with Yudhishtira and the other heroes,
restraining that grief that stems from weakness and leads to weakness, as
the Lord had told Arjuna on the battleﬁeld, now proceeded to the banks of
the Ganga to perform the last rites for the lost heroes.
When Kunti saw the body of Karna being lamented over by his wife, she
could not bear it. The same Ganga who had taken her baby away so many
years ago was now carrying away his ashes. The river ﬂowed as placidly as
it had on that day, indifferent to the cares and worries of humankind. Karna
had no sons to perform his obsequies. They had all been killed. He was as
much of an orphan now as he had been when she had abandoned him. Now
was the time to make recompense for the great wrong she had done to her
ﬁrstborn. She walked with ﬁrm steps toward Yudhishtira and said, “There is
one more person to whom you have to make an offering.” The brothers
looked enquiringly at her. The Lord alone knew of her dilemma and
watched with compassion.
“Who is this person, to whom I must make an offering, Mother?”
Yudhishtira asked. “I do not understand.”
“It is Karna. You must make offerings for him.”
“Why should I, a Kshatriya, perform the funeral rites for a sutaputra (the
son of a charioteer)?” Yudhishtira asked in surprise.
Kunti was dumb with agony. But at last she burst out, determined to see
that Karna died with all the honors of a Kshatriya, even though she had
denied him a life as one. “He was a Kshatriya and not a suta!”
“Not a sutaputra!” they all cried out in amazement. “Tell us, Mother, who
was his father?”
Kunti said, “Karna was the son of the sun god Surya. He was Suryaputra
and not a sutaputra! His mother was a Kshatriya princess who abandoned
him as a baby, since she was still a maid, and ﬂoated him down the river,
where he was found by the suta Adhiratha and his wife Radha, who brought
him up as their own son. He preferred the name Radheya to all his other
names, for she was the only mother he had ever known.”
The Pandavas looked in amazement at her. At last, Yudhishtira asked,
“Who was his real mother?”
All eyes were ﬁxed on her. She shot a look of desperate appeal at the
Lord. His lotus eyes were ﬁlled with inﬁnite pity and infused in her the
strength to speak the truth. Turning to Yudhishtira, she said ﬁrmly, “I am his
mother. Karna was my ﬁrstborn child.” Saying this, she slipped to the
ground in a faint. Vidura rushed to her side.
Yudhishtira was too stunned to speak. At last, he whispered, “Karna was
my brother!” Arjuna clutched his arm and cried out, “What have I done? I
have killed my own brother and gloated over his death.”
The Pandavas were prostrate with grief. When Kunti revived, Yudhishtira
asked her, “Tell me, did Karna know of this?”
Krishna answered for her and said, “Yes, he knew.” The Pandavas hung
their heads in shame as they each recalled the times they had taunted him
with the name sutaputra and he had kept silent. “Mother, how could you do
this to us?” they asked Kunti and walked away, leaving her alone with her
grief. For one month they had to stay in huts built on the banks of the river
until the obsequies were over. Yudhishtira was inconsolable. The sages
Vyasa and Narada came to him, and Narada told him the story of Karna and
tried to comfort him.
In the meantime, the Lord, with his usual compassion, went to the
stricken queen. He realized what she was going through. She had denied her
ﬁrstborn to save the other ﬁve, and now they, in turn, were shunning her for
the ﬁrst time. He alone stayed with that brave queen who had borne with
fortitude all the trials and tribulations to which her life had been exposed
from the time she was a child.
Addressing the Lord, Kunti said, “Salutations to you, the Uttama Purusha,
Lord of all. As an ignorant spectator cannot recognize the actor in his
theatrical robes, so also have we failed to recognize you, who have chosen
to hide your true nature under the garb of an ordinary mortal. Yet due to
your grace, I have been able to penetrate the garb and recognize you for
what you are. Salutations to you, O Krishna, born of Vasudeva and Devaki.
Salutations to you, the Brahman of the Upanishads, who has appeared in his
sportive manifestation as the foster son of Nanda. Salutations to the lotus-
eyed and the lotus-garlanded one. J ust as you released your sorrow-stricken
mother Devaki from the prison cell of the wicked Kamsa, so have you
rescued me and my sons from several perilous positions. I can scarcely
recount the dangerous situations from which you have saved us—from the
murderous attempts on Bhima, from the ﬂaming palace at Varanavata, from
the menacing demons of the forest, from the humiliation of the gambling
meet, from the perils of our forest life, from the weapons of these great
warriors in this mighty battle, and now, ﬁnally, you have saved our line
from 
extinction 
by 
protecting 
Uttara’s 
fetus 
from 
Asvattama’s
Brahmasirastra.”
Then Kunti placed before the Lord, in faultless accents, a unique prayer.
“O preceptor of the universe, I pray to you to give me bad luck all the time.
Let dangers surround me always, for it is only when peril threatens us from
all sides that we feel your divine presence. It is only when our minds
become single pointed through extreme sorrow and anxiety that we are able
to call to you with the greatest of intensity, and it is only then that you come
running to help your devotees and save them from their dire straits.
Therefore, I do not pray for comforts, for when we are surrounded by ease
on all sides, the treacherous mind fails to focus itself on you, who alone are
responsible for both comforts and discomforts. Therefore do I thank you for
not having given me comforts, I thank you for not having given me any
wealth, for I therefore have realized that you are my only treasure. You
alone are the wealth of those who have no other wealth. I care not for
kingdom or glory but only to have your blessed vision all my life. I deem
you to be the eternal time spirit, endless and irresistible, whose steady
movement makes no distinction between good and bad, small and great.
What Gandhari said is true. It is this quality of yours that brings about feuds
among people, leading to their death and destruction. You have neither
friends nor enemies. Even the destruction of your so-called enemies is only
to bless them and give them salvation, for your avatara is only to redeem
all jivas. The apparent birth and activities of the unborn and unchanging
apirit, the soul of the universe, in all your various incarnations, is indeed a
mystery. O Lord of all, pray do not abandon us, for we are totally dependent
on you. We have no refuge except your lotus feet. My beloved Lord, help
me to cut asunder my attachment to my people. Casting off all other
attachments, let my mind cling to you alone. Let it, like the Ganga ﬂowing
to the ocean, ﬂow toward you, the inﬁnite ocean of mercy, in a never-ending
stream of love and delight. O friend of Arjuna! O Krishna! Leader of the
Vrishnis! Lord of Gokula! Protector of the weak and the holy! Master of
yoga! Sole spiritual guide of all humanity! Salutations again and again to
you!”
So saying, Kunti fell like a log at the feet of the Lord, unable to contain
her love and emotion, ﬁlled with ecstasy when she thought of all the times
he had saved her and her sons, overpowered with love for this glorious
being who stood before her in ﬂesh and blood. The Lord cast his bewitching
smile on her and blessed her with total and undying devotion for him, which
is what she had prayed for.
After a month of mourning, Yudhishtira agreed to hold his coronation at
the suggestion of Krishna, Vyasa, and the rishis. Honored by all the
Brahmins and sages, extolled by the bards, Yudhishtira was led to the throne
by the Lord himself, who ofﬁcially placed the sacred crown of the Kurus on
his head. It was a unique moment, when man was crowned by God
incarnate. How blessed was Yudhishtira!
In the Ramayana, it was the opposite. God as Sri Rama was crowned by
man—by Vasishta. After this, Bhima was crowned yuvaraja, Vidura was
made minister and personal counselor, Sanjaya was put in charge of ﬁnance,
Arjuna was the commander-in-chief of the army as well as foreign minister,
Nakula was made the head of the army, Sahadeva was made the king’s
personal protector, Dhaumya was high priest, and Yuyutsu was personal
attendant to his blind father and Gandhari, as well as the manager of the
outlying provinces. At the end of it, Yudhishtira said to Krishna, “My Lord,
you have given me back my kingdom. In your affection for us you have
played the role of a man—you, who must be worshipped as the eternal soul.
You are the Lord of lords, yet you have pretended to be a man, wept with us
and laughed with us. You are our guiding star and show us the truth. The
only recompense I can make is to fall at your feet and wash them with my
tears.” So saying, he fell at Krishna’s feet.
In spite of being consoled and instructed by the sages and by the Lord
himself, Yudhishtira’s deep remorse for his role in the destruction could not
be assuaged. Unaware of the inscrutable power of the Lord, not realizing
that everything happened because of the divine will alone, Yudhishtira was
overcome by sorrow for what he thought to be his fault.
“What a wicked fellow I am,” he said. “For the sake of this body that is
going to be food for jackals and vultures, I have caused the destruction of
countless men. I will never be liberated from hell even after thousands of
years of suffering, slayer as I am of children, Brahmins, friends, relatives,
brothers, and teachers. The tremendous suffering I have caused to these
women, whose husbands have met their death because of me, cannot be
atoned by sacriﬁces or charities.”
Brooding over his sins, Yudhishtira fell into a mood of great depression
from which everyone failed to shake him. The Lord’s sermon to Arjuna had
not been imbibed by him. Thinking himself to be the sole slayer, he wept
and mourned and could not be comforted. Seeing this, the Lord decided to
take him to the spot where the dying Bhishma lay. He had two purposes to
fulﬁll: one was to clear Yudhishtira’s doubts and the other was to bless
Bhishma, before he departed for his heavenly abode. Accordingly, everyone
set out for Kurukshetra, where Bhishma lay on his bed of arrows. Krishna
laid his healing hands on the dying knight’s pain-wracked body.
Immediately, he felt calm and at peace, and his mind grew clear. With
strong accents, he proceeded to impart to Yudhishtira the lesson of dharma,
as the Lord wanted him to do.
First, Bhishma folded his palms to the Lord and said, “Why should you,
who are the epitome of dharma, ask me to impart this lesson to Yudhishtira?
This is in line with your mysterious design to bring glory to your devotees.”
The Lord smiled and said, “Your utterances will be at par with the Vedas
and will bring undying glory to you. So speak on.”
Fixing his eyes on that form that had been residing in his heart all these
years, Bhishma’s eyes ﬁlled with tears, and turning to Yudhishtira, he
spoke, “My son, strange indeed are the ways of the Divine. Why should
dangers stalk the fortunes of your family, which has the son of dharma as
its head, which is protected by the mighty Bhima, the son of Vayu, the wind
god, and Arjuna, with his reputed Gandiva, and above all having Sri
Krishna, the Supreme Being, as your guiding star? O King! None can know
the will of the Supreme Being. Even the far-sighted rishis, who have tried
their best to fathom the divine mind, have recoiled in utter failure.
Therefore, O leader of the Bharatas, recognizing that all that has happened
has been wrought by providence alone, follow the dictates of that divine
will and protect the people, who have become like unclaimed orphans.
Dharma is that which leads to the advancement of evolution. To do one’s
swadharma without coming under the sway of opposites, like and dislike,
hatred and love, is the way of the enlightened person. You are bound to act,
but the action alone is your right and not the fruits, which should be given
over to the Lord. That is the way to liberation. The action done with
attachment leads to bondage, and the same action done with detachment
leads to liberation. Renounce this ego, which claims all glories for itself.
Neither the credit nor the discredit is yours. The Lord alone is the doer and
the instigator. Strange indeed that you, who have the Lord Narayana himself
as your companion, should have come to me for advice. You have been
looking upon him as your uncle’s son, your dear friend, your selﬂess ally,
and your most important well-wisher. You have even used his services as an
advisor, a messenger, and even a charioteer, taking advantage of his love for
you. He in turn has played these various roles for you with perfection,
feeling neither elation nor humiliation. He is the soul of all, even sighted,
devoid of egoism, free from all taints. In his inﬁnite mercy he has now
brought you here, for he knows that the time for my departure has come.
May that Lord, with his radiant face, who is realized only in the hearts of
aspiring yogis, be present before my physical eyes until my life leaves my
body!”
Yudhishtira’s eyes ﬁlled with tears when he heard this, for he realized, as
Arjuna had at the vision of the cosmic form, that he, whom they had taken
for granted and treated familiarly, was none other than the Supreme Lord.
He closed his eyes and mentally begged pardon for the sins of commission
and omission he had been guilty of. When he looked at the Lord with tears
in his eyes, he found him looking encouragingly at him, for Sri Krishna
knew what was passing through his mind. Feeling immeasurably comforted
by that look of compassion, Yudhishtira turned to his grandsire and
proceeded to question him on all the aspects of dharma, the duties of men
in general, their duties according to their caste and birth, the duties of a
king, of women, the seekers of liberation, and so on.
Bhishma gave a lengthy discourse on these and various other matters,
covering all details of dharma so that Yudhishtira was completely satisﬁed.
His teachings can be summarized in brief: “Destiny is powerful but self-
effort can modify it. Truth is all powerful. The adherence to truth can never
fail in life. One should practice self-control, humility, and righteousness.
One should be neither too soft nor too stern. One should be able to adjust to
circumstances. Weakness is not a virtue, and it breeds many evils.
Compassion should be combined with stern discipline. Tolerance of
irregularity and adharma leads to downfall. Life rusts in indolence;  it shines
in industry. Hatred is the most terrible poison. Love is the one constructive
force and is all-powerful. It can reclaim even a sinner. Dharma is one’s only
friend, for it follows the body that has been abandoned by all.”
Then Yudhishtira asked him in what form one should worship the
Supreme Being and in what manner. Bhishma smiled, and looking at
Krishna standing before him, he said, “The Supreme God, the one object
who is the sole refuge of all humankind is standing before me. The Lord of
the universe, the God of gods, by him is pervaded the entire universe. By
meditating on him and his manifold names, one can transcend all sorrow.
He is the greatest source of energy, the highest penance, the eternal
Brahman. Surrender your heart and soul to him, for he is the Lord of the
past, present, and future. He is the Supreme Purushottama.”
So saying, Bhishma ﬁxed his eyes on the shining form of the Lord
standing before him and chanted the “Vishnu Sahasranama,” the thousand
and one names of Lord Vishnu. He then lay back exhausted, yet exalted.
Having blessed Yudhishtira, he told him to come back later when
uttarayana had commenced, the beginning of the summer solstice when the
sun starts its northward journey.
Accordingly, on the ﬁrst day of uttarayana, all of them returned to the
same spot. Bhishma turned in adoration to Krishna and said, “You are the
Lord of the universe, the Uttama Purusha, the Creator, the eternal soul.
Please reveal to me your Vishvarupa (cosmic form).”
The Lord did as he wished, and Bhishma called for ﬂowers and
worshipped the Lord with them. He said, “You are the Lord of the universe,
you are the Uttama Purusha and the Creator. You are the eternal soul. Grant
me leave to cast off this human body. Permitted by you, I will reach the
highest state.”
The holy one spoke, “Devavrata, I grant you leave to return home. Go
back to the Vasus. You will never be born again in this world of mortals.
Death is waiting at your doorstep, waiting like a servant for your summons.
You have my permission to summon him.”
Once again, Bhishma exhorted the Pandavas, “Follow the truth always.
Strive for it in thought, word, and deed. Practice self-denial. Be
compassionate. Attain knowledge of the Supreme Brahman. This is the
dharma of all dharmas. Know that where Krishna, the universal self,
dwells, there dharma will ever be. And where dharma is, victory will
inevitably follow.”
Then, closing his eyes, he steadily gathered his vital energy to the top of
his head and thence passed out in the form of a great light, as he gently
willed himself to die. Those around saw a wonderful glow leave his body
and rise up to the sky. A gentle breeze blew and heavenly instruments
played sweet music as he threw off his mortal coils, the stainless knight
before whom even death had to wait. The Pandavas performed the last rites
for their beloved grandsire.
It is said that on the next day, when Bhishma’s ashes were taken to the
Ganga for immersion, the river stopped ﬂowing, and goddess Ganga rose up
and approached Krishna, weeping for the death of her beloved son.
Krishna consoled her, “O Divine Mother! Why do you weep like an
ordinary mortal? Don’t you know that your son was one of the immortals
known as the Vasus, who had to spend these long years on Earth, due to a
curse? Rejoice that now he has returned to be with the immortals!”
At the Lord’s words, Ganga was consoled and resumed her ﬂow, taking
with her the ashes of her son.
The Lord now returned with the Pandavas to Hastinapura and stayed with
them for some months to advise and console them. At last, he decided to
return to his city of Dwaraka. Bidding a fond farewell to the Pandavas, he
got into his chariot. Though they had seen their kith and kin slaughtered and
their own children murdered, the Pandavas had not felt such a great sense of
loss as they experienced when Krishna left. They felt like rudderless boats
tossed in the sea of circumstances. Lapped by the waves of his divine
inﬂuence, they were secure and protected. Even during the major crises of
the war, they had thought themselves invincible, since he was in their midst.
Unable to bear the parting, Arjuna escorted him beyond the city gates. He
refused to return until at last Krishna had to ask him gently to go back, for
his presence was essential to Yudhishtira. Like a creeper whose sole support
had been suddenly snatched away, Arjuna returned with bent head and
brimming eyes after having seen the last of the ﬂag with the sign of Garuda
gaily ﬂuttering in the wind. Thousands of citizens of Hastinapura had also
followed to have a last glimpse of the Lord. Wearily, they returned home.
On the way, Krishna met an old Brahmin friend of his called Uttanga. The
old man had obviously not heard of the stupendous happenings that had
been taking place in the land, for he was an inveterate traveler. Very politely
he inquired about the welfare of the Pandavas and Kauravas. Krishna
brought him up to date about the affairs of the country. The old man became
very angry when he heard of this, for he felt that the Lord could have
stopped the battle had he so willed! Krishna paciﬁed him and explained to
him that it was in concordance with the cosmic plan that the battle had
taken place. For him to interfere in the governing of the universe according
to the impersonal law of karma, which he himself had established, would
not be correct.
“O Uttanga! Age after age I am born into the world to uphold
righteousness. If this can be accomplished only by the destruction of the
unrighteous, then I appear in the form of Kala, or all-consuming time, and
bring about the destruction of all creatures. Life and death are but two sides
of the same coin. One cannot exist without the other. I did my best to bring
the sons of Dhritarashtra to the path of righteousness, but those souls,
steeped in wickedness, would not listen to the voice of dharma, even
though I granted them a vision of my cosmic form. Thus, the battle became
inevitable.”
Unrestricted freedom granted to an individual can only lead to downfall,
as was proven in the case of Duryodhana, who had never had any
restrictions placed on him. Freedom is a universal principle and not the
prerogative of any single person. This is why history never seems to care
for individuals. Even the strongest of the empires and greatest of emperors
have been reduced to the dust of the earth. It is not the individual, whether
in the form of a person, family, community, or empire, that is of value to the
universal justice. What is of value is the fulﬁllment of the cosmic plan, the
necessity to grow by a gradual ascent through various degrees of humanity
to the divinity present in each one of us. Hence, the Lord’s actions in the
Mahabharata war have a cosmic purpose and a universal intention that
cannot be completely understood unless we also have reached the shores of
that ocean of immortality, of which he is the essence.
Uttanga accepted the Lord’s explanation and begged to have a vision of
the cosmic form, which was shown to the Kauravas. Krishna obliged him.
After this, he asked him to choose a boon.
Uttanga being a simple soul did not have many wishes, but at the Lord’s
insistence he said, “My Lord, having seen your universal form, all my
desires have been fulﬁlled, but since you insist, I have one request. Many
times in my travels I have suffered from intense thirst. So if it pleases you,
kindly grant me the boon that I shall get water whenever I need it.”
“So be it,” said the Lord, and having blessed him, both proceeded on their
separate ways.
Later on, during his travels in the desert, Uttanga was afﬂicted with a
terrible thirst and mentally he reminded the Lord of his boon. J ust at that
moment, he was approached by an outcast hunter, clad in ﬁlthy rags,
carrying a water bag made of animal hide, from which he offered some
water to the thirsty man. But parched though he was, the high-born Brahmin
refused to touch the water offered by an outcast, in such unclean conditions.
The hunter went on his way, and the Lord appeared. Uttanga upbraided him
for sending this unclean creature to give him water.
Krishna smiled and replied, “O Uttanga! For your sake, I have prevailed
upon Indra, the king of the gods, to give you amrita (the nectar of
immortality). He was loath to do this, since he did not want to grant
immortality to a mortal. Since I insisted, he agreed, provided I allowed him
to take on the form of a low-born hunter, in order to test the purity of your
mind. I accepted the challenge, thinking that you had attained wisdom and
the eye of equality, which would enable you to see the same universal
divine spirit shining in each and every creature;  whether high caste or
outcast. By your foolish act, you have lost the opportunity to become
immortal.”
Uttanga realized his mistake and understood the lesson that the Lord was
trying to teach him. He resolved to become a jnani, a man of wisdom in
action as well as in principle.
F ix  your mind on me, be devoted to me, sacriﬁce unto me, and
prostrate before me. I  give you my solemn pledge that you will come
to me, for you are indeed dear to me. Abandoning all duties, take
refuge in me alone. Do not worry, for I  shall deliver you from all
evils and give you total liberation.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Satchidanandaya Namaha!
2 9
T he Story of  Sudama
Tasyaiva mesauhridasakhyamytri dasyam punar janmani janmani
syad,
Mahanubhavena gunalayena vishajjatat satpurusheprasanga.
“May I, who have had this intimate association with the great Lord
Krishna, the abode of all auspicious qualities, be blessed with
devotion, comradeship, and servitude to him life after life. May I
also have association with his devotees.” Thus spoke Kuchela.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD PURANA
The Lord now reached Dwaraka, where the Yadavas welcomed him back
with great joy. Unfortunately, he was not able to remain there for more than
a few months since Yudhishtira once again urgently summoned him back to
the Kuru capital. Yudhishtira was still tormented by the gruesome events of
the past, and his unhappiness was made worse after Krishna’s departure.
Despite all the advice he had had from Bhishma and all the sages, he still
found it impossible to reconcile himself with the carnage that had taken
place. Vyasa now advised him to conduct the Ashvamedha Yajna, which
would absolve him from all sins. Yudhishtira agreed and sent word to
Krishna to come soon and bless the yajna, as he had blessed their Rajasuya
Yajna so many years before.
The Lord arrived just in time to save the child in Uttara’s womb.
Reducing himself to the size of a thumb, he entered her womb and
safeguarded the fetus from the effects of the missile, directed at it by
Asvattama. That was done at the time when Asvattama had directed the
missile at her fetus. Now it was almost time for her delivery and this is the
story of how he entered the womb and safeguarded the fetus until it was
born. Even so, when the infant was born, it seemed to be lifeless. His sister
Subhadra and Abhimanyu’s widow, Uttara, started to weep and begged the
Lord to save the child. Krishna said, “If the infant is touched by one who is
a nitya brahmachari it will come to life.”
Many sages were standing around, but none dared to touch the babe.
Finally, the Lord himself stepped forward and took the lifeless child in his
arms. Gently, he passed his lotus palms along the inert body from head to
toe. At the touch of his blessed hands, the infant took a great gulp of air and
began to breathe, and the onlookers were ﬁlled with amazement and joy.
The palace now became an abode of happiness. Even Yudhishtira shook
off his mantle of sorrow, for the baby was a boy. He would be the successor
to the throne of the Kurus, and he had been born at a most auspicious time.
The sages pronounced many blessings and said, “O King, when this
sprout of the Kuru race was about to be destroyed by the Brahmasirastra, he
was saved by the all-powerful Vishnu and delivered to you as a gift from
him. Therefore, he will become famous as a great devotee and a great king
and should be given the name Vishnuratha (the one saved by Vishnu). He
will also be popularly known as Parikshit (one who tests), since he will
always be testing creatures to ﬁnd out whether the form he saw in the womb
is the same as the one manifesting in all creation as the indweller.”
When Parikshit was in his mother’s womb, he had noticed a divine person
standing close to him—the size of a thumb, lovely to behold, blue as the
rain cloud, wearing a yellow robe and a shining diadem. He scattered the
power of the Brahmasirastra with his mace. As the tenmonth-old fetus
watched in wonder, the ﬁgure disappeared. He came out of the womb and
from thence gazed at all the faces he saw looking for that inner dweller.
Preparations were now made for the Ashvamedha Yajna. Since the
treasury was sadly depleted after the great war, they did not have enough
funds to conduct the yajna. At the Lord’s bidding, the brothers went to the
Himalayas and returned with the necessary wealth. The ceremony was then
performed with all due pomp, and Yudhishtira’s mind felt vastly relieved.
The Lord spent some more time with the Pandavas. Arjuna and he visited
all the favorite haunts of their youth. Arjuna had by now forgotten most of
the glorious teachings of the Gita yet considered himself to be a great
devotee. The Lord always contrived to bring about situations that would
deﬂate the egos of his devotees. One day, while they were wandering
disguised as ordinary travelers, they came across a Brahmin who was
ferociously sharpening his sword. Arjuna gazed at him in surprise and
enquired, “Why are you resorting to violence, O Brahmin?”
The Brahmin replied, “There is no sin in killing for the sake of my Lord.
Three people have treated him very badly. One is that rascal Sudama, who
allowed him to wash his feet and forced him to eat unclean rice ﬂakes, the
second is the sage Narada, who is always disturbing my Lord’s sleep by his
incessant reciting of his names, and the third is that fellow Arjuna, who
insisted on making my Lord take on the menial position of his charioteer!”
Krishna looked on in great amusement at Arjuna’s discomﬁture and
whispered to him that discretion was the better part of valor. It would be
expedient to quit the scene before the irate Brahmin discovered his identity!
The incident with Sudama referred to by the Brahmin took place soon
after the Mahabharata war, when the Lord was residing at Dwaraka.
Sudama was a Brahmin who was also known as Kuchela because of the
tattered condition of his clothing. He had studied with Krishna and
Balarama at Guru Sandipani’s ashrama at Avanti. Though they had parted
with many promises to keep in touch with each other, as is the case with
many childhood friends, they lost contact with each other. However, this
intimacy with Krishna had evoked a deep and abiding devotion in the poor
Brahmin boy. He had lived a life of complete austerity and devotion to the
Lord, totally uncaring about his own welfare, wandering about, singing the
Lord’s songs and meditating on his glories. Observing his careless state,
some well-meaning friends decided to get him married so that he would
have someone to care for his daily needs. They found him a wife who was
well suited to his temperament, pious and devoted. With such an
improvident husband, she was forced to fend for both of them and eked out
a miserable existence by begging. Kuchela hardly ever thought of inquiring
how they managed, for he was conﬁdent that the Lord would provide, as he
had always done. His needs were few, and if something was placed before
him, he would eat it. Otherwise, he would fast. Neither made much
difference, for he was ever immersed in some inner vision that sustained
him. But his poor wife, who was not so blessed, could not bear to see the
plight of her children. Once it came to pass that even the pittance she
managed to get was denied, and the hearth had not been lit for many days.
Unable to bear the sight of her children starving to death in front of her
eyes, she approached her husband and said, “O holy one! I have heard you
say that the worshipful Lord Krishna, protector of the Yadavas, the consort
of Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth, was your friend and schoolmate at the
gurukula. He is a lover of pious men and a haven of refuge for all. Could
you not approach him for a small favor for us? It will mean nothing to him
and will be the saving of our family. The condition of our children is pitiful
indeed. Pray listen to me and go to him.”
Kuchela was not at all happy at the idea. The thought of begging for
material goods from one who was capable of granting immortality was
galling to him. The Lord knows the wants of all. The fact that he did not
give him wealth meant that he was undeserving of it. What an insult it
would be to go and coerce him into giving it! The lack of material wealth
meant nothing to him. He felt no hardship whatsoever. He was the true
devotee, asking for nothing but the opportunity to love and worship the
Lord every moment of his life, with no expectation of fruits.
After having been entreated by his wife many times, he agreed, more
because of the exciting thought that he would be able to meet the Lord of
his heart once again. But he was worried at the thought of going empty-
handed to meet such a glorious personage. It was considered proper to take
a gift, so he asked his wife to get him something. She looked at him in
astonishment. Their hut was absolutely bare of even the basic necessities,
and here was her husband asking her to produce a gift ﬁt for a king! What
was she to do? Suddenly Kuchela himself came up with a bright idea.
“I know just the thing he will like,” he said. “Krishna was very fond of
the little ﬂakes of beaten rice the guru’s wife used to make for us. You must
get some paddy and pound it for me to take to him.”
The poor lady was at her wits’ end. Where was she to get anything? They
had not cooked anything in the house for days, and they had exhausted the
charity of their neighbors. She ran out in despair and saw a man
approaching her. Though he was a complete stranger, she ran to him and
opened her palms in supplication. He took three ﬁstfuls of grain from the
bag he was carrying and gave it to her. It is said that the Lord himself had
appeared to help her! Thankful at having obtained something from such an
unexpected quarter, she hurried back, cleaned the paddy, and pounded it
into ﬂakes. It looked a pitiful handful indeed. She searched in vain for some
cloth in which to tie it, but could ﬁnd nothing in that poverty-stricken
household. Tearing off a piece of her own tattered attire, she lovingly tied
up the rice ﬂakes into a very small bundle. This she anxiously presented to
her husband when he set out the next morning.
Kuchela went with a joyous heart, for he was going to see the Lord soon.
By evening, he reached the precincts of Dwaraka and saw the golden turrets
of the palaces glinting in the rays of the setting sun. With every step he
took, his heart beat faster in anticipation. He had not eaten for days, yet his
feet hastened of their own accord, and his tired eyes gleamed at the thought
of the bliss in store for him.
“Will he recognize me?” he wondered. “Will he remember me?”
Timidly, he hovered outside the palace gates wondering what to do. The
guards looked at him curiously and turned away, for they did not think him
worthy of attention.
Inside the palace, Krishna’s consort Rukmini wondered at his distraught
and restless behavior during the day. He seemed unable to concentrate on
anything. He kept going to the balcony to watch the road. At last, she
timidly ventured to ask him what the matter was. “I’m expecting a very dear
friend,” he replied. “Prepare the best dishes and the best room for him, for
there is none so dear to me!”
Rukmini also watched and waited anxiously for the sight of a royal coach
or chariot, but evening came and no one appeared. Suddenly, the Lord got
up from the swing bed on which he was resting and rushed to the palace
gates. Rukmini followed him in haste, carrying all the auspicious articles
she had kept ready to welcome the honored guest. When she reached the
palace gate, she was surprised to ﬁnd Krishna clasping to his chest an
emaciated and wizened morsel of humanity, a mere bundle of skin and bone
held together by a few rags!
However, at a sign from her Lord, she hurried forward to wash his feet
with perfumed water.
Krishna practically carried Kuchela upstairs to his room, preceded by
ladies carrying lamps. He seated him on his own favorite swing bed. He sat
himself down beside Kuchela with his arm ﬂung around his scraggy neck.
Rukmini proceeded to fan them both with the royal fan made of a yak’s tail.
Kuchela was absolutely bewildered. Never in his wildest dreams had he
expected a welcome like this. He sat in a daze of happiness while Krishna
pelted him with questions, to which he could scarcely formulate a sensible
reply.
“O dearest friend! Why have you never come to see me before? How has
life treated you? Are you married? How many children do you have?” This
was Kuchela’s cue to put in his request, but the poor man had completely
forgotten the reason for his visit. He could only smile and gaze adoringly at
that beloved face, so close to his. As soon as he arrived, Kuchela was so
overwhelmed by the magniﬁcence of his surroundings, he had felt quite
ashamed of his pitiful offering and had tucked the bundle of beaten rice
ﬂakes under his armpit. Everyone in the palace was astonished to see the
Lord worshipping this emaciated Brahmin with such love. A man who
would be scorned by the world in general the Lord was treating like his own
brother. What merit had this man acquired to deserve such a treatment?
Soon after, Balarama also came, and the two of them sat on either side of
the Brahmin and reminisced over the happy days of their youth at the
gurukula. The Lord spoke of the greatness of the preceptor.
“Those through whom one is born in this world are one’s ﬁrst gurus.
Thus, the parents should be ﬁrst worshipped as gurus. The one who invests
the sacred thread and gives eligibility to study the Vedas is the second guru,
greater even than the ﬁrst. And ﬁnally, the one who imparts the wisdom of
the Supreme is the greatest of all gurus. Know that one to be none other
than myself. Though I reside in all beings, yet worshipping me through the
guru is the worship I like best. It is only by the grace of the guru that one
can attain the fulﬁllment of spiritual aspirations.”
Kuchela replied, “O Supreme Divinity! O thou teacher of all the worlds!
What further fulﬁllment in life can I have who have had the great good
fortune to have spent some days with you at the abode of the guru? How
can I ever forget those days? My life since then has been spent in
contemplation of that blessed memory. Do you remember how we used to
go to the forest to collect ﬁrewood for the guru and how one day we were
caught in the heavy rain and could not return? You sheltered me in your
arms then, until our compassionate preceptor came and rescued us in the
morning and blessed us. Surely, it is through the blessing of that venerable
being that I have had the opportunity of being with you like this.”
So saying, Kuchela nestled close to his beloved divinity, gazing at him
with adoring eyes. However, he was careful to keep his arm pressed close to
his side all the time, for he did not want the Lord to see his miserable
offering.
The Lord knew what was in his mind and looked pointedly at the place
where he could see a tiny piece of rag sticking out and waited expectantly
for the gift but in vain. Kuchela only hugged the bundle closer. Though the
Lord wants nothing and expects nothing, yet even the humblest gift his
devotees offer is accepted with joy, for it is the coin of their love. It is not
the magnitude of the gift that matters but the magnitude of the heart that
offers it. In front of the Lord of Lakshmi (goddess of wealth), all of us are
Kuchelas. Even so, we can offer him a ﬁstful of rice ﬂakes, moistened with
the tears of love that overﬂow from our eyes. At last, having lost all hopes
of being offered the gift, the Lord teasingly said, “O dearest friend! What
gift have you brought for me from your home? Even a triﬂe offered to me is
precious to me. Whatever is offered with love, be it leaf or ﬂower or fruit or
grain or even water, I accept with delight!” Despite these broad hints and
pointed looks at the hiding place, the bashful Brahmin looked down and did
not present the handful of rice.
At last, tired of waiting and not wishing to tease him any further, Krishna
stretched forward and pulled out the miserable bundle from its hiding place.
“Ah, what is this?” he asked teasingly with a twinkle in his eyes. “O, you
sly one! Were you keeping it as a surprise for me?”
He opened the rag and looked at the contents and continued, “How clever
of you to guess what I would like most. Do you remember the rice ﬂakes
our guru’s wife used to make for us? I have never eaten such delicious stuff
since then, but I feel sure your wife must have made a similar kind. These
royal princesses do not know the art,” he said with an amused look in
Rukmini’s direction.
So saying, he took a ﬁstful of the stuff and ate it with evident relish. Then
he took another and was just about to put it in his mouth, when Rukmini
caught his hand. “Lord, be not hasty. Would you give me away as well?”
she asked. The moment the Lord ate one ﬁstful of the potent stuff, charged
with the entire love of Kuchela’s heart, he had already blessed him with all
worldly goods. Had he taken another, Rukmini feared that she, the goddess
of wealth herself, would have to take up her abode as handmaid to
Kuchela’s wife! If we were to offer our gifts to him with the love and
humility of a Kuchela, there is no doubt that we would also be showered
with all fortune. But we know only the language of the market. Our gifts are
bribes, and hence we get what we deserve.
Kuchela spent a blissful night with the Lord. During the whole time not
once did he even remember the reason for his visit and the condition of his
wife and children. Even though Krishna prompted him many times in order
to test him, Kuchela’s mind did not waver from its contemplation of the
Lord. At last, when morning dawned, he rose up reluctantly, hoping that the
Lord might urge him to stay, but he made no such attempt, neither did he
offer him anything. All he did was to urge him to make frequent trips in the
future. They parted with utmost affection. Krishna hugged him, personally
escorted him to the gate, and bade him a fond farewell. Kuchela was ﬁlled
with sorrow not because he had not received anything but because he had to
part from his beloved master.
As he trudged his weary way back, he suddenly remembered the reason
for his visit and wondered what he was going to say to his wife. But he put
the matter out of his mind as of no consequence, for his mind was ﬁlled
with the bliss of the hours he had spent with the Lord. “Though I am the
poorest of the poor, he hugged me to his bosom, which is the abode of
Lakshmi. Like a brother, he made me sit on his own couch, which he shares
with his consort. My tired body was fanned by his queen! He himself
performed every form of service to me, including washing my feet with his
blessed hands and applying sandal paste. Thus, I was honored like a king by
him who is the God of all gods. In his mercy, he did not tempt me with
wealth, for he knows that a sudden acquisition of wealth may go to a poor
man’s head, make him vain, and eventually lead to his downfall.”
Ruminating in this manner, that noble one reached the spot where his
hovel had stood. In its place, he saw the towers of a mansion, as luminous
as the one he had just left. He stopped short, wondering whether in his
bemused state of mind he had retraced his steps back to Dwaraka. The
mansion was surrounded with numerous parks and gardens and by lakes
ﬁlled with lotuses and swans. While the poor man stood hesitating outside
the gates, he saw a vision clothed in silks and jewels gliding toward him,
escorted by many beautiful maids carrying auspicious articles. To his
bewildered gaze, she appeared like the goddess Lakshmi herself, and he felt
sure that he was seeing an illusion. When the beautiful lady came closer and
addressed him as her lord, he realized that she was none other than his own
wife, whom people used to call Kukshama because of her emaciated
condition. Gently, she led him inside the mansion and bade him take a bath
and clothe himself in the costly garments that had been laid out for him. His
beautiful children now came and danced all around him. Disturbed by this
display of wealth, Kuchela closed his eyes and remained rapt in
contemplation.
“The reason for the attainment of such heavenly prosperity by a poverty-
stricken man like me must be my meeting with that embodiment of grace
and plenty. He showers his blessings on his devotees as the clouds, their
rain, without any announcement and as if they were a triﬂe. Yet he ate my
insigniﬁcant gift of beaten rice with such delight. But, O Lord, the fact that
I have been blessed with such wealth is a great trial for me. All I want is to
be blessed with undying devotion and service to you, life after life. This is
my only prayer.”
Thinking thus, the Brahmin wanted to renounce those objects of worldly
enjoyment, but to please his wife, he continued to live in that mansion as if
he were only a guest and completely detached from it all.
“Let not the change in my material state affect my spiritual state,” was his
continuous prayer. “Let me ever rejoice in you alone and not in the baubles
of a worldly existence.”
He had not minded when he went about in tatters and did not care now
that he was clad in silks. He was as unaffected by his afﬂuence as he had
been by his poverty. He was the true sthithaprajna, or the man of
enlightenment, of the Gita. Actually, the Lord had conferred all worldly
goods on him not for his sake but for the sake of his wife, who was also a
devotee and who had not been able to bear the pitiful state and hungry cries
of her children. Because of her great love and ﬁdelity, this poor woman had
conquered the Lord, who cannot be conquered with swords. She continued
to do her duty to her husband and children until the end of her life, while
Sudama spent his time in continuous meditation on the Lord, until the knot
of his body’s bondage was cut asunder and he attained the deathless realm.
The highest charity is the relinq uishing of the idea of violence
toward all beings. Penance is the giving up of desires. Valor is the
conq uest of one’s nature. Honesty is looking upon everything with
an eq ual eye.
LORD KRISHNA IN UDDHAVA GITA,
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
O Arjuna, seek refuge in him alone with your entire being, for by his
grace you will be able to attain supreme peace and the eternal
abode.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Dharmakrite Namaha!
3 0
Dharma Rules Supreme
Kaunteya pratijanihi
Na me bhaktha pranasyathi.
O son of Kunti (Arjuna), I give you my solemn word, My devotee
will never fall.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
The years following the battle of Kurukshetra were peaceful. Yudhishtira
proved to be an ideal monarch, reminding one of the days of Rama Rajya
(the rule of Lord Rama). He ruled wisely and well, and the interests of his
subjects were always closest to his heart. Dharma ﬂourished once more in
Bharatavarsha, as the Lord had predicted it would, after the purifying
effects of the Mahabharata war.
Once, Lord Krishna, accompanied by his friends Uddhava and Satyaki
and a retinue of sages, went to the city of Mithila in the country of Videha,
famed since the time of J anaka for its philosopher kings. The present ruler
was also a great saint and devotee of the Lord. It so happened that in that
city there was a poor Brahmin called Srutadeva, who found his life’s
fulﬁllment in devotion to Lord Krishna. He met the limited wants of his life
with what chance brought him, without much effort on his part. Daily he
got just enough for his upkeep, neither more nor less, and he was well
content with it. The hallmark of a noble soul, according to the Lord in the
Gita, is that he should be satisﬁed with whatever comes unasked, secure in
the knowledge that the Lord would see to even his material wants. The
Lord’s visit to Mithila was prompted by the desire of both these devotees,
the king of the land as well as the poor Brahmin, that he should visit their
residences. The whole route from Dwaraka to Mithila was crowded with the
populace, which thronged to have a glimpse of him whose fame had
reached the far-ﬂung corners of Bharatavarsha. At the sight of the Lord’s
wondrous face and charming smile, all felt as if they had attained the bliss
of enlightenment. The streets of Mithila were beautifully decorated and
packed with people eager to have a vision of the holy one. Both Bahulasva,
the king of Videha, and Srutideva, the Brahmin, fell at his feet and invited
him to come to their residences, at the same time on the same day. He
accepted both their invitations, for they had chosen an auspicious time, and
he did not want to hurt either of them or show preference for the king.
When the Lord and his retinue arrived at the palace, they were royally
welcomed, entertained, and served a magniﬁcent repast of the choicest
viands on golden platters. The king washed the feet of the blessed one and
sprinkled the holy water on all those assembled there. He personally
attended to all his wants, not allowing anyone else to do even the humblest
task. Having worshipped him in this way, the king begged him to stay on in
their city for some days and thus bless everyone. The Lord agreed.
In the meantime, the poor Brahmin had also arranged a modest reception
for the Lord of his heart at his humble dwelling place on the same day. The
hut had been swept clean and bright, and the mud ﬂoor covered with straw
mats and sprinkled with tender shoots and all the other auspicious articles
he could afford. When the Lord arrived accompanied by the sages and a few
of his close friends, the Brahmin’s joy knew no bounds. He danced about in
an ecstasy of devotion, and seating them on the mats, he washed the holy
feet of the Lord and sprinkled the water reverently on himself and his
family. Then he worshipped him with fruit, tulsi leaves, and lotus petals, all
gathered from the forest. He placed before his holy guests some herbal
water and some fresh gooseberries. This water when drunk after eating the
gooseberries became sweet and delicious. Of the many mud bowls
presented before the Lord, he picked out an imperfect one and drank from
it. When Srutideva saw this, tears sprang to his eyes, and falling at the feet
of the Lord, he said, “O holy one! It is ﬁtting indeed that of all these cups,
you should have picked this faulty one, for similar is the way in which you
deal with human beings—picking out the frail and imperfect ones like me to
shower your blessings. Your behavior will appear strange to those whose
vision is clouded with conceit. Only the mind saturated with devotion can
grasp your mysterious ways. May you be pleased to instruct us who are
helplessly ﬂoating in the ocean of samsara (mortal existence). How can we
serve you, in what forms worship you?”
Holding Srutideva’s hand in his own, the Lord gave a discourse on the
greatness of the sages. “O noble one, know that I am ever present in the
holy ones, the sages. They are my reﬂections, and therefore they should be
adored with the same faith with which you adore me. That indeed is my true
worship, not the worship of images with costly offerings. Holy men are the
embodiment of all the Vedas, and those who worship images in temples and
slight these sages who are my very self are guilty of a great crime. Know
that they have come here now to bless you. They travel all over the world,
sanctifying all regions with the dust of their feet.” When he had thus been
blessed by both the Lord and the sages, Srutideva’s cup of bliss was
overﬂowing.
By these two episodes, Lord Krishna demonstrated that he himself is a
devotee of his devotees. By accepting both invitations at the same time, he
showed that neither poverty nor afﬂuence need be a bar to his worship. It is
the attitude of the mind that matters. One person may offer a gooseberry
and another a costly fruit, but in the eyes of the Lord, the value is the same
if it is offered with love.
Most religions stress the fact that riches are a hindrance to realization.
This is because wealth is accompanied by pride, and this is the barrier that
blocks the path to God. The poor, on the other hand, ﬁnd it fairly easy to
turn to God, for they have no one else to turn to and no bank balance to
depend on. The rich, surrounded by sycophants, ﬂatterers, and coffers ﬁlled
with gold, feel themselves to be secure and have no need of God.
Bahulasva shows us that even riches need not be a barrier to devotion, for
though he was a king he considered himself merely the custodian of the
wealth given to him by the grace of the Lord. He spent his wealth in helping
the poor and needy and attending to the wants of the sages, mentally
surrendering all his wealth to him, by whose grace alone he had procured it.
The lesson to be learned from Srutideva is that the poor need not lament
over the fact that they cannot offer anything of value to the Lord. In his
eyes, the greatest value lies in a humble and devoted heart and not in any
physical object.
Fifteen years of Yudhishtira’s rule had passed when Vidura approached
Dhritarashtra one night and told him that it was time for him to quit this
worldly life, for which he should have had a distaste by now, retire to the
forest, and remain there in contemplation for the rest of his earthly sojourn.
The blind king realized the truth of his wise brother’s counsel. He decided
to leave the very next day and declared his intention to his nephews.
Gandhari, Sanjaya, and Kunti also determined to follow him, for they felt
that Vidura’s advice was intended for them as well. All attempts to dissuade
them proved futile. The Pandavas tried their best to stop at least their
mother from following them, but Kunti thought it was her duty to serve the
blind couple until the end of her life. Perhaps it was to atone for what her
sons had been forced to do to theirs.
Her parting words to Yudhishtira were, “Do not try to dissuade me, for I
know I must die in service. Look after Sahadeva, for he is the youngest—
Madri’s beloved son. Never swerve from dharma.” Thus till the end, Kunti
proved to be an exemplary character. The next day, they departed to the
forests in the foothills of the Himalayas, accompanied by Vidura.
The Pandavas had been told not to go to see them for a year at least. At
the end of the stipulated period, they visited them and were most pained to
see their self-imposed deprivations. During their stay of a few days, Vidura,
their beloved uncle and savior, passed away after having given all his
spiritual wealth to his favorite nephew, Yudhishtira. A year or two later,
Dhritarashtra, Gandhari, and Kunti exposed themselves to a forest ﬁre and
allowed their mortal bodies to be consumed. Sanjaya spent the remainder of
his life meditating in the Himalayas.
Soon after this, Arjuna came to stay with Krishna at Dwaraka, and the
Lord realized that his friend had completely forgotten the glorious message
of the Gita delivered to him at Kurukshetra. An opportunity was provided to
remind him of it. There was a Brahmin who lived in the city who found that
all his babies died the moment they were born. Each time this happened, he
would carry the corpse to the gates of the Lord’s palace and cry out, “My
child has died because of the misdeeds of the Kshatriyas who persecute
holy men and who are evil-minded. Poverty and misery are the fate of those
subjects who are ruled by oppressive kings, devoid of control over their
senses.”
On the occasion of the death of the ninth infant, when he went for his
routine visit to the assembly hall of the Yadavas, Arjuna happened to be
there, and he was quite upset to hear this lament. “O learned one!” he said.
“What is the use of wailing like this? Is there no Kshatriya here who wields
a bow in this land of yours?” After the Brahmin left, he questioned Krishna
about these occurrences. The latter merely smiled and said, “Who can avert
the effects of one’s past karmas? They have to be experienced by all.”
Arjuna was not satisﬁed with this answer. Thinking himself to be the great
hero of the Mahabharata war and forgetting to whom he owed his victory,
he hurried after the Brahmin to offer his services. “Do not grieve, O blessed
One,” he told the unhappy father. “Let me know when your wife conceives
again, and I promise to deliver the baby, safe and sound.”
The Brahmin was not impressed by Arjuna’s claims to be an expert in
midwifery and asked scornfully, “Who are you that you can boast of
achieving what not even Balarama, Krishna, Pradyumna, or Aniruddha can
do?”
Arjuna proudly proclaimed his lineage. “True, I am not one of them, but I
am Arjuna, the middle one among the Pandavas, wielder of the Gandiva.
Do not belittle my prowess, which evoked the wonder and admiration of the
three-eyed Lord (Shiva) himself! I shall restore your next issue to you, even
if I have to conquer the lord of death himself. If I fail to fulﬁll this vow of
mine, I shall enter into the ﬁre as an expiation for breaking my word!”
The Brahmin, who had nothing to lose, was ready to clutch at any straw
and readily agreed to let him know as soon as his wife conceived. This
yearly event took place shortly after, and he came at intervals to apprise
Arjuna of the progress of the fetus in the womb. Each time he came, Arjuna
would have a secret parlance with him. Krishna would ask him what it was
all about, but Arjuna refused to avail himself of the opportunity to conﬁde
in him and always gave an evasive answer. Such was his arrogance that he
never once thought of asking for the Lord’s help. At last the great day
dawned. The Brahmin rushed to Arjuna with the momentous news that his
wife was in labor. Armed with his Gandiva and his inexhaustible quiver, he
stepped out, conﬁdent of success. Hardly had he put one foot out when
Krishna, whom he had thought to be sleeping, called after him, “O Arjuna!
Where are you off to so early in the morning?”
The Lord was giving him a last chance, but the overconﬁdent Arjun
replied, “I’m just going for a stroll!”
“Going for a stroll? Armed with the Gandiva? Whom are you expecting
to meet, my dear friend? Are there wild animals in the vicinity of Dwaraka?
You look as if you are expecting some trouble. Would you like me to
accompany you?”
“No, no, no,” said Arjuna hastily. “Do not trouble yourself so early in the
morning!”
“No trouble at all, my dear friend,” said the Lord, with a twinkle in his
eyes. “Anyway, be sure to call me if you need me. You know I will always
come to your aid.”
But even after these hints, Arjuna did not think of conﬁding in him. Proud
of his prowess as the victor of a mighty war, he quite forgot that without
Krishna’s aid, he would have been reduced to pulp a thousand times during
the war. So also, the Lord whispers in each one’s heart to go to him for aid
in all troubles, whether big or small, for there is no burden, however heavy,
that he will not bear for the sake of his devotee, no problem, however petty,
that he will not solve. But steeped in our own conceit, we fail to make use
of his offer “Surrender your ego to me, O beloved Arjuna. Place your trust
in me. Invest your heart in me, and I will surely lead you to victory in this
life and liberation hereafter.”
This was the sweet path of bhakti (devotion) and prapti (selfsurrender),
which he had taught Arjuna on the ﬁeld of the Kurus, but the latter had
forgotten it. However, he was soon to have his pride humbled and to realize
that without divine aid, he was totally helpless, as we all are.
Arjuna marched up to the Brahmin’s house and was met with the latest
bulletin by the anxious father. Arjuna allayed his fears and proceeded to
cover the entire labor room with a cage of arrows, in a very precise and
methodical manner, as he had covered the Khandava forest, a long time ago.
He then placed himself at the entrance, so that none could pass either in or
out without his knowledge.
Within a few minutes, he heard a dreadful wail, and the distraught father
rushed out crying, “Monster! What have you done with my baby? Nine
times this has happened, but at least I used to be left with the corpse. But
now thanks to your meddling, even the body has vanished. I should never
have listened to you. When neither Krishna nor Balarama could protect me,
how could I have expected you to do so?”
The Brahmin was not one to mince words. His temper was always
precariously balanced, and this was the last straw. Pointing scornfully at the
woodshed, he continued, “There lies the woodshed. Help yourself to what
you need. At least let me have the satisfaction of seeing you roast alive!”
Poor Arjuna had gone quite pale and silent as the harangue continued.
“Give me a little time,” he begged. “I’ll search the whole world. If your
baby is anywhere in all the three worlds, I’ll surely discover him and bring
him back to you!”
The Brahmin gave him a sceptical look and reluctantly agreed to let him
go. Calling on his favorite deity, Lord Shiva, to help him, Arjuna proceeded
to Yama’s abode as well as to Indra’s heaven, but he could not ﬁnd the
infant anywhere. After a vain and frustrating search, he returned empty-
handed to the Brahmin, who had thoughtfully prepared the pyre for him, so
sure had he been of the outcome of Arjuna’s search! Arjuna was pale but
unafraid. He lit the ﬁre, prayed to Lord Shiva, and then took three steps
backward to get the momentum to jump into the middle of the ﬂames. Even
at this last moment, he never thought of invoking Krishna. But the Lord
never forsakes a devotee who has once entrusted himself to him. Even if the
devotee forgets, the Lord never forgets! As Arjuna took the third step
backward, he found himself clasped ﬁrmly from the back by two loving
arms. Without looking around, he tried to shake off the restraining hold and
said, “Leave me. I’ve made up my mind to give up my life!”
“What temper!” Krishna chided softly, turning the distraught Arjuna
around. “Why could you not have approached me, O friend? Don’t you
know that there is nothing I would not do for your sake? You’re my friend,
my devotee, my dearly beloved. You are in me, and I am in you. How can I
desert you? Come with me, and I will show you something.”
So saying, he took Arjuna with him in his chariot, and they started in a
westerly direction, passing over the seven continents and seas. Arjuna felt
as if the chariot were being lifted above Earth, and they penetrated the
intense darkness of outer space. The Lord sent his divine discus, having the
brilliance of a thousand suns, to illumine their path. At last they reached
Vaikunta, the abode of Lord Vishnu. Arjuna beheld an expanse of milk-
white water crowned by huge waves, stirred up by powerful winds. There
he saw Adishesha, the huge and awe-inspiring serpent, luminous with the
countless gems set on his thousand hoods, looking like a mountain of
sparkling crystal and gleaming with blue necks and tongues. Seated on the
body of that mighty serpent he saw the Supreme Lord, Mahavishnu (the
great Vishnu), blue as the inﬁnite, clad in yellow garments, with a
wondrously serene face and lustrous eyes. He had the Shrivatsa mark on his
chest, like Krishna, and he was adorned with the jewel Kaustubha and the
garland, the vanamala. He was surrounded by sages, attendants, and his
accoutrements, which had assumed forms.
Lord Krishna made obeisance to him as part of his divine play, and
Arjuna prostrated with great excitement. The Supreme One spoke in a
sonorous voice, “I brought the sons of the Brahmin to my realm so that I
might meet you both. You are the incarnations of the great sages, Nara and
Narayana, who are my own selves. Though you have no desires of your
own, you have to perform your duties for the good of the world and for the
maintenance of dharma.”
To his astonishment, Arjuna saw that the Brahmin’s children were all
playing around that divine being. They were most reluctant to leave the
abode of bliss and return to Earth, which seemed to them like a dark planet.
Krishna and Arjuna took leave of this mighty being and returned to Earth,
where they presented the bewildered Brahmin with ten offspring, in the
place of the one promised by Arjuna.
Once again, Arjuna realized his own folly, and he also saw that all the
successful enterprises a person appears to have achieved through self-effort
are only the operation of the Lord’s grace. He prostrated full length at Lord
Krishna’s feet and begged forgiveness, as he had done on the battleﬁeld
when he saw the cosmic form.
Krishna smiled tenderly at him and said, “Remember, Arjuna, we are both
linked together as the Lord Vishnu said. I will never desert you, even if you
forget me. The moment a person surrenders to me, I will set his steps in the
right direction. In fact, my friend, I shall carry him safely through the jungle
of this earthly existence as the mother cat carries her kitten.”
The last years of the Lord’s sojourn on Earth were spent in giving advice
to those nearest to him and those who approached him for help. Herein lies
the greatness of his teachings. He insisted that each individual could and
should ﬁnd the path best suited to his or her own nature.
The qualities of Prakriti are three in number—sattva, rajas, and tamas.
Human nature can also be categorized into these three. Sattvic people are
characterized by their goodness, love of contemplation, nonviolence, and so
on. Rajasic individuals are ever engrossed in acquiring, losing, and
spending, ﬁlled with anger, lust, and greed. Tamasic people are full of sloth
and ignorance, interested in nothing but sleeping and eating, content to lead
an animal existence, uninterested in any form of knowledge, dull and
inactive. Actually, we can never ﬁnd these three in their pristine forms. All
of us are a mixture of the three, with a predominance of one or the other.
The sattvic individual is a being of light and goodness;  the rajasic man, on
the other hand, is constantly worrying and scheming and unable to sit still.
To such men of action as Arjuna, the Lord’s advice was to go ahead and act,
but to dedicate the fruits of all action to him, the Lord, who is the controller
of the action as well as the giver of the fruits. This may sound difﬁcult, but
it can be done with practice. It is only a question of training the mind in a
different channel. No one can remain entirely without action, as the Lord
says. Hence, it is imperative to know how to act, so that the action does not
create bondage. Every action done with desire opens the door to another
desire, which forges a link in the iron fetters of karma, leading to repeated
births. This is called samsara chakra (the wheel of the cycle of birth and
death).
Thus, it is not the action that causes bondage, as is commonly
misunderstood, but the desire that prompts it. If it is prompted by selﬁsh
motives, then, however good it may appear externally, the Lord, who sees
into the hearts of all, will ﬁnd it worthless. If the motive is pure even if the
action fails to bring about the expected results, it will cause no bondage and
will lead to evolution. Hence his admonition to do our duty, regardless of
success or failure. What the world considers a failure may well be a
glorious success in the eyes of the all-seeing Divinity.
The moment we get rid of our anxiety over the results, we experience a
sense of freedom that is felt only by the sages. Another step forward is to
act with the thought that one is not the doer but only an instrument of the
Divine. Repeatedly thinking thus, we will be able to control our passionate
nature and bring it under the pure and calm inﬂuence of the divine will.
This is a better path for the raja-sic man than trying to follow the path of
the sattvic nature, forcing himself to sit and contemplate when his whole
being longs to ﬁnd fulﬁllment in some form of activity. Those whose
predominating quality is tamas (ignorance) should sit and practice japa
whenever possible. This needs no exertion or effort, which is foreign to
their nature. The Lord’s name, even if repeated without much understanding
and in a mechanical fashion, will eventually bring about a change in the
psyche, just as medicine taken even without knowledge of its beneﬁts will
cure a patient. The main thing is that one should resolve rightly and force
oneself to sit and practice, however lazy one might feel. Even a person
devoid of understanding, if he or she decides that he or she must improve
and starts practicing japa yoga (disciplined practice of japa), will certainly
improve.
We are all potentially divine children of inﬁnity, and it is possible for each
one of us to work out our own salvation, at our own pace. In the
beginningless and endless school of mortal existence, no one is ever
expelled. We may have to repeat a class, not once, but many times, perhaps
take ten births or ten thousand, but no soul is damned forever, for every soul
is divine. Whether he or she is high or low on the scale of evolution is
immaterial. What matters is that each one should try to perfect himself, and
in this very afﬁrmation and sincerity lies the victory. This is the beautiful
philosophy of Lord Krishna, which promises fulﬁllment to every individual
whatever his temperament or weakness by pointing out to each the path best
suited to his or her nature. There is no dictatorial afﬁrmation that one path
alone is the only truth and way. There may be as many paths as there are
people, for each individual is unique.
He created us in this way, and he accepts us as we are. He allows us to
proceed from where we stand, not requiring that we jump to some
impossible peak of purity beyond the capacity of most of us. He points out
that even those who worship other gods worship him, the Purushottama, for
the entire creation is nothing but he and the worship of “another” is
impossible. He who sees the One is the seer, the man of true knowledge.
This alone is supreme knowledge. All else is secondary. Like the delicate
web coming out of the spider, the intricate web of creation comes out of
him. Instead of struggling in the web like the poor ﬂy, if we only surrender
our little egos to him, he will guide us and take us to our ﬁnal destiny of
union with him, the source of all. The major block in our path is our ego,
and this was the question raised by his father, Vasudeva.
His parents had seen his divine form at birth, but as is usual with the
human mind, familiarity and increasing intimacy had made them forget the
glorious vision, and they considered their son to be human like themselves.
But as they neared the end of their lives, they remembered the advice of the
sages at Syamantapanchaka and decided to approach him for advice.
Vasudeva came to him and said, “Considering this perishable body as the
self, I have been thinking of you, the supreme self, as my son alone. Human
birth, with all the faculties of mind intact, is very difﬁcult to get. Having it,
I have wasted it without bestowing attention on its real purpose, which is to
seek union with you, the Supreme Self. You have bound this whole world
with the cord of self-centered attachment. At your very birth, you had
declared to us the reason for your incarnation. Yet, bound as I have been to
this bodily existence, I have forgotten those words. Pray instruct me how
best I can get rid of my feelings of being the doer, the strong pull of my ego,
which is what blocks the path to liberation. You have given liberation to so
many, my son, will you not tell me, your father, how best I can attain it?”
The Lord bowed to his father and said with a smile, “O noblest of the
Yadus, all beings, you and I and everything moving and unmoving should
be looked upon as manifestations of the Divine, not merely me, your son.
There is nothing wrong in thinking, ‘ This is mine.’ The difﬁculty comes
when you limit your outlook to your family relations alone. Expand your
vision so that it embraces the whole world. If you see the divinity in me,
your son, then look upon all men and women as your sons and daughters
and thus recognize that they are also divine. I am Visvatma, the soul of all.
Therefore, you should consider the whole world as your own and every
creature in it as myself. See the unity underlying the diversity, and you will
come to realize the entire universe as nothing but an extension of your own
self. The span of divinity that glows in the core of your being blazes in the
heart of all creation. Do not limit your ego to the narrow conﬁnes of your
own body and family, but let it expand to embrace the whole of creation.
There lies your path to liberation!” Thus instructed by that preceptor of the
universe in such a simple manner suited to his personality, Vasudeva gave
up his narrow vision and attained wisdom.
The next one to approach him was Krishna’s mother Devaki. Her desires
were different, but in fulﬁlling them, he led her also to liberation. “Krishna,
my most beloved son, I know you to be that Supreme Being who for some
mysterious purpose of his own has taken birth in my womb. I have been
gloriﬁed by that contact, but weak as I am, I cannot get over my maternal
instincts. I long to be able to have a glimpse of my six sons who were born
to me before your advent. I have heard it said that you brought back the son
of your guru, Sandipani, at the request of his wife. Will you not accede to
my request and show me my other sons, your brothers, who were murdered
by my brother Kamsa?”
Krishna smiled his assent, and immediately it seemed to Devaki that her
six children were dancing about before her eyes. She picked them up and
satisﬁed the unfulﬁlled longing of her heart to nurse them. Deluded by the
veil of maya, the illusionary power of the Lord, she seated them in her lap
and embraced and kissed them. Imbibing the nectarlike remains in Devaki’s
breasts, the prasad (that which was left after offering to Krishna), they
attained liberation instantly. They prostrated to her and to Krishna and
vanished to the divine spheres. Devaki was ﬁlled with wonder at these
strange happenings and asked Krishna, “O Son! I know you to be a master
yogi. Tell me, did you conjure up these infants by magic? Were they real or
were they only an illusion?”
Krishna laughed and replied, “O Mother! This whole world is only an
illusion. It has no permanence. Everything we experience with the ﬁve
senses is transitory. Some things last for a few seconds, some for a few
hours, some for a few years, and others for a few centuries. But they will all
have to come to an end, some time or other. Everything is subject to change
—birth, growth, decay, and death. These are the inherent qualities of all
things. The only true, everlasting, and immutable entity is God himself. So
put not your desires on ephemeral things like husband, house, and children,
which can at best yield only a passing joy, but place it at the lotus feet of
him who is full of unending bliss and who is the only reality. Surrender to
him with love, and he will guide you to the life eternal. Why clutch at a
straw when there is a boat close by, ready to rescue you from the ocean of
samsara? Attach yourself to him, and he will steer you to the shore of
inﬁnite bliss.”
Following this beautiful advice given in the form best suited to her
mentality, she also attained liberation. Unfortunately, his sons did not think
of approaching him. The Lord never thrust his advice on those who were
not receptive. Knowledge is not to be bartered in the marketplace or
shouted from rooftops. One who seeks knowledge should approach a
teacher in all humility and only then will one be able to beneﬁt from the
instruction. Thus, he never tried to thrust unwanted advice on his sons,
neither did he criticize them nor try to dissuade them from their chosen
path. It was ever his way to be the witness, detached and uncritical, unless
called upon to exert his will.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Sarveshvaraya Namaha!
3 1
T he C urse of  the Sages
Shiro 
madpadayo 
kritva, 
bahubhyam 
cha 
parasparam,
Parapannam pahimamisha bhitham mrityugraharnavath!
Placing his head at my feet and holding them with both hands he
should pray, “Deign to give shelter to this, thy servitor, who seeks
refuge at thy feet through dread of the crocodile called death, which
infests this ocean of samsara.”
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
The end of the era was fast approaching. Many years had ﬂed since the
great battle of Kurukshetra, and men had almost forgotten about it. In fact,
thirty-six years had gone by, the period stipulated by Gandhari before the
fulﬁllment of her curse. Under the reign of Yudhishtira, the land had
reposed in peace and plenty. The people living in different parts of
Bharatavarsha looked up to their wise and noble emperor and were content.
All the wicked rulers had been wiped out and the great powers subdued
during the war. None remained to challenge the might of the Kuru dynasty
except perhaps the Yadavas themselves.
Their country, stretching from the city of Mathura on the river Yamuna to
Dwaraka on the western seacoast, was ﬁlled with abundance and plenty.
They were invincible warriors, and there were none who dared to attack
them. As citizens, they had become habituated to a life of luxury. Under the
noble leadership of their hero and God, Lord Krishna, they had come to
enjoy a prosperity and status hitherto unheard of. Their cities were fantastic,
their mode of living was splendid, they possessed great treasures. The men
were healthy and strong, the women, beautiful and charming. They were
blessed in all ways. But slowly, like a canker growing within a perfect rose,
afﬂuence was taking its inevitable toll. The high principles of physical
ﬁtness and spiritual brilliance that had characterized the previous generation
were giving way to moral laxity and physical weakness. Krishna’s own sons
were no exception to this. No leniency would the Lord show to any, just
because they happened to have a blood relationship with him. The whole of
creation was related to him. The Lord knew that the Yadavas could not be
checked by any other power and that he himself would have to take the
surgeon’s role and amputate the putrid arm. The time was ripe for the
fruition of Gandhari’s curse.
To fulﬁll the conditions of the curse, the Lord invited certain sages to visit
Dwaraka. Some members of the Yadava families, including Samba,
Krishna’s own son by his wife J ambavati, approached the sages in mock
humility and questioned them about an imaginary problem. They had
dressed Samba as a pregnant woman, and thrusting him forward, they
mockingly asked the sages, “O sages of unerring insight, here is a young
and beautiful woman who is expecting to be a mother soon. She is too
bashful to question you directly and wants us to do so. She is anxious to
know the sex of the child to be born to her. She is keen to have a boy. With
your great powers, perhaps you could grant her wish!”
All this was said in the most sarcastic fashion, since they had completely
forgotten the Lord’s repeated advice to them to venerate and honor all holy
men who were repositories of divine wisdom. The holy ones turned a
scornful eye on them and pronounced a dire curse, “O fools! It will be
neither a girl nor a boy but an iron pestle, which will be the instrumental
cause of the destruction of your entire race.”
The men burst into loud guffaws at this impossible pronouncement, but
their mirth was short-lived. Hardly had the sages gone when Samba began
writhing in the throes of some mortal agony, and very soon, an iron pestle
came out of his stomach, as foretold by the rishis. Everyone was terriﬁed
and ran to King Ugrasena with the pestle and made a clean breast of the
whole story. The king was in a panic when he heard this. He gave the pestle
to a blacksmith and made him powder it into ﬁne dust. But one small bit
was left that deﬁed all efforts to pulverize it. This was thrown, together with
the ﬁlings, into the sea that lapped the shores of Dwaraka. These iron ﬁlings
were all washed by the sea to the farther shore, to the mainland of Prabhasa,
where they grew into a kind of grass called erata, strong and sharp like
swords. The small piece of iron was swallowed by a ﬁsh, which was later
caught by a ﬁsherman. He took the iron piece from the stomach of the ﬁsh
and forged it into an arrowhead, which he gave to a hunter called J ara.
Nobody told the Lord about these details, yet he knew everything. Though
he was capable of counteracting the evil effects of the curse, he did not care
to do so. He himself was the spirit of time, which mows down all creatures,
and all these things had come to pass with his full approval.
Rumors of these happenings began to circulate among the people, and a
nameless terror was felt by them. At the very moment when their pride was
at its height, it seemed as if the shadow of disaster was looming over them.
Ugrasena knew well that if only they maintained their self-control, they
need have no fear of anything, for they had no external enemies. Their foes
were all within themselves. These opponents were greed, lust, and anger,
against which Krishna had warned Arjuna long ago on the battleﬁeld.
Ugrasena knew this and sternly forbade the sale of intoxicating liquor
within his dominions, on pain of death. His subjects, appreciating the
wisdom of this command, obeyed implicitly.
Knowing that the time was approaching for the Lord to depart from this
mortal world, all the gods, with Brahma and Shiva at their head, came to
Dwaraka to have a glimpse of him before the ascension. In that city of
Dwaraka, famed for its beauty, resplendent with riches of every kind, they
saw the wondrous form of Krishna, upon which they looked with
unwinking eyes. Covering that noble one with myriad celestial garlands,
they extolled him.
Brahma said, “O gracious Lord! In times gone by, I came to you and
prayed that Earth may be relieved of her burden of evil. O soul of all the
worlds, you have accomplished all this and more. You have established
dharma in the minds of men. Your fame has spread all over the world. Born
in the line of Yadu, you engaged yourself in various sportive activities for
the good of the world. O Lord, by hearing or repeating these accounts of
your lilas, men in the Age of Kali, which is about to come, will be puriﬁed
and will be able to overcome the darkness of ignorance. O Supreme Being!
It is now 125 years since you incarnated yourself in the line of the Yadus. O
support of the universe, you have now accomplished the purpose of the
gods. There is nothing left for you to perform. By the curse of the holy men,
even the clan of the Yadavas is on the verge of extinction. So if you think
ﬁt, may you be pleased to return to your transcendental abode. Protect us,
your servants, appointed by you as guardians of the world.”
The Lord gave his assent to this prayer and set about making ﬁnal
preparations for his departure.
Witnessing all these terrifying portents and watching the Lord’s grave
mien, Uddhava, his constant companion, prime minister, and supreme
devotee, approached him while he was sitting alone, in silent
contemplation. Making due prostrations, he spoke to him in all humility, “O
Master Yogi, your holy life blesses all those who hear about it. Yet I fear
that you are making ready to quit the world after bringing about the
destruction of your own clan. Though you are capable of warding off the
curse of the holy men, I see that you have done nothing about it, which
makes me fear the worst. O Krishna, my beloved Lord and master! I cannot
dream of remaining on this Earth even for a second without being able to
see your divine form. Even those who have only heard about you cannot
bear to continue leading a mundane existence. How then can I, who have
been serving you for the whole of my life, bear to be separated from you?
Sitting and lying, waking and sleeping, walking and talking, eating and
playing, I have been with you. I have worn your cast-off clothes, eaten only
the remnants of your food, and adorned myself with the sandal paste and
ﬂower garlands discarded by you. Thus have I lived in your shadow, O
Master, for over a hundred years. How can I bear to be parted from you? O
Lord of lords, friend of the helpless, do not leave me behind. Take me with
you when you go to your divine abode.”
The holy one smiled tenderly at Uddhava, for he was very dear to him,
having been with him from the time that he had come to Mathura from
Gokula. Uddhava was the perfect example of the jnanabhakta, the man of
wisdom who also has intense love for God, a rare combination, and it was
to him that the Lord gave his ﬁnal message. Gently lifting up his devotee,
who was lying like a fallen log at his feet, the blessed Lord said, “O
Uddhava, it is true that I am going to leave the world, for my work here is
over, but for you there is still much to be done. You shall be the bearer of
my message to the world. Having surrendered your ego at my feet, you
have sailed through life with ease. But, O Uddhava, those who come after
us will not know this method of sweet surrender and the greatness of this
path of love that you have learned. You shall therefore be their teacher.
Love for family, friends, and for one’s own body is what binds the jiva to
the world and makes it repeat innumerable births. Therefore, abandon all
attachment to your own relations, surrender yourself to me, and wander
over the world, recognizing my presence in everything. Know that this
world, as it is grasped by the mind and senses, is but a magic show. It is
transitory. For the one with uncontrolled senses, there is an erroneous
perception of multiplicity. Such a person is subject to the notion of good
and evil and to the differences between ordinary action, inaction, and
prohibited action. But one who sees the whole world as nothing but the
Supreme Lord is ﬁlled with joy and sees no differences and meets with no
obstruction from any source. Such people have transcended the distinction
between good and evil. They neither avoid the bad because of compulsion
nor promote the good because it is advantageous. Their responses are
spontaneous and unmotivated, like those of a child. Ever established in the
truth of the spirit, they see the Lord as the essence of this passing show and
roam about, free from the bondage of karma.”
Uddhava replied, “O Lord of lords, this wondrous state of detachment is
difﬁcult for people like me to achieve. Pray instruct me in the method of
achieving it, for you are the supreme teacher!”
The Lord replied, “All people are endowed with the capacity to
investigate the nature of truth and lift themselves from the evils of a life of
instinct, such as the animals live. They need no teacher for this. Human
beings are endowed with intelligence and discriminative power and can
surely be their own teachers. By observation and inference, they will be
able to understand what constitutes their ultimate good. The senses by
themselves will not be able to discover that which is pure spirit. But through
presumption and inference and by using the faculties of the mind and
intellect for that purpose for which they are meant to be used, the intelligent
person can come to know of the existence of the spirit. The world itself is
full of illustrations pointing to the existence of the Supreme. I will repeat to
you the conversation between the great sage Dattatreya and our own
ancestor, Yadu. King Yadu once met this sage during the course of his
wanderings and questioned him thus: ‘ O holy one, kindly tell me what is it
that ﬁlls your heart with joy though you possess none of the objects of
enjoyment.’
“Being thus questioned by our ancestor, the sage replied, ‘ Hear from me,
O King, of the twenty-four gurus, from whom I have learned much during
my travels. These are Earth itself, the air, the sky, water, ﬁre, the sun, the
moon, doves, a python, the ocean, a river, a moth, honeybees (two types),
an elephant, a deer, a ﬁsh, Pingala (a courtesan), an osprey, a maiden, the
arrowsmith, a snake, a spider, and a wasp.
“‘ From Earth, I learned patience and nonretaliation. From the trees, I
learned to strive unselﬁshly for the good of others and ﬁnd the meaning of
existence from this very striving. Like the air, the sage should remain
unpolluted by the good and bad effects of contacts with sense objects. The
air passes over many types of places but is unaffected by their contact. As
the sky is not tainted by the clouds that pass over it, so also the atman is not
affected by the body it inhabits. Like water, the sage is pure and holy and
sweet. Like ﬁre, he is unpolluted by anything, yet puriﬁes everything that
comes in contact with him. As ﬁre resides unrecognized in the heart of fuel,
so the Supreme Lord resides in the heart of everything. Though the moon
appears to be waxing and waning, yet it never alters. So also, the changes of
the body do not affect the atman. As the one sun is seen reﬂected in all the
different types of water, so also the one spirit is seen reﬂected in all things.
“‘ From observation of a family of doves, I learned that one should never
have intense love or attachment to anything, for that will only lead to one’s
downfall, like that of the dove that committed suicide when it saw that its
wife and nestlings had been caught by a fowler. From the python, I learned
not to be swayed by the sense of taste. The python does not hunt for its prey
but swallows whatever creature comes near it, driven there by its own
destiny. So also, the saint should eat whatever is offered to him, regardless
of taste. Like the ocean, he should be still and calm, deep and profound.
Ever absorbed in the contemplation of the Divine, he should not be
exhilarated by a plentiful supply of the good things of life, nor dejected by
their absence, like the ocean that keeps its boundaries, irrespective of the
amount of water that ﬂows into it. Objects of the world will attract us, but if
we fall under their sway, we will perish like the moth in the ﬂame that
entices it. Like a honey-gatherer bee that collects just a little nectar from
each ﬂower, the sage may accept small quantities of food from just a few
houses. But he should not hoard anything, for if he does, he will perish like
the bee that gets burned with the honey it has hoarded, when the honey
gatherer sets ﬁre to the hive to collect the honey. A sage should never have
physical contact with a woman, for the sense of touch may betray him just
as even the mighty elephant is enticed and caught by the touch of a she-
elephant. The deer, on the other hand, is trapped by the hunter who imitates
the call of its mate and thus lures it to the trap. So the sage should not listen
to sensuous music, for the sense of hearing can also betray him. The ﬁsh
perishes due to its attachment to the sense of taste, so the wise should be
abstemious in eating and thus conquer the sense of taste, which is the most
powerful of all the senses. Each animal has a special sense organ that is
extra sharp and that leads to its downfall, but in a human being, all the ﬁve
senses are equally powerful, so he should be on his guard on all fronts.
From the courtesan Pingala, I learned that desire is the source of all
sorrows, and desirelessness leads to the most intense delight. The osprey
taught me that a sage should avoid all objects prized by others, for if he
possesses such a desirable object, everyone will be after him. The poor little
bird was chased by all the big birds because it happened to be carrying a
tiny morsel of meat in its beak. Like the child, a sage should roam about
having no worries and immersed in the bliss of the self alone. Only the
child and the sage can be said to be totally free of cares.
“‘ From watching the actions of a maiden who was wearing a number of
bangles, I learned that a sage should travel alone. Even two bangles on the
maiden’s wrist made a noise and attracted the attention that she wished to
avoid, so she was forced to take off all her bangles one by one, until only
one was left. Then there was no more noise. From the arrowsmith, I learned
how to concentrate the mind without allowing it to be distracted by
anything else, however grand. His attention did not waver from the arrow
tip he was sharpening, even though a royal procession passed by him. Like
the snake that never makes a hole for itself but always occupies one made
by rats, the sage should never possess a home of his own. The Supreme
Being creates, manifests, and withdraws the universe from himself and into
himself, just as the spider does with its web. From the wasp, I learned that
on whatever object a person concentrates his mind, whether it be through
love, fear, or hate, he attains the state of that object.
“‘ Finally, my own body has been my teacher, from which I learned
dispassion and discrimination. Yet I am unattached to it, for I know that it
belongs to others, to the dogs, vultures, and jackals that may feast on it after
death. The human body is attained only after countless births, in the bodies
of different creatures, and while it lasts, the wise person should strive for
the attainment of the ultimate good and use it only for the purpose for which
it was given.’ Thus the sage, having instructed King Yadu in this fashion,
went on his way, free and unattached, with no cares.”
The Lord enumerated the qualities of the true sage to Uddhava because he
was ready for a life of renunciation, and karma yoga to Arjuna, who was a
man of action. To all persons he outlined the mode of action best suited to
their temperaments, thus facilitating their spiritual progress.
Next, he gave a discourse to Uddhava on the Bhagavata Dharma, the
great doctrine of bhakti and surrender, which was Krishna’s unique
contribution to the history of the Sanatana Dharma.
Those who follow the Bhagavata Dharma should not shun action, but
should continue to follow their svadharma, giving up all rites, rituals, and
works aimed at fulﬁlling their own selﬁsh interests. They should observe
those rules of internal and external puriﬁcation known as yamas and
niyamas. After having thus puriﬁed their minds and bodies, they should
seek an enlightened guru, whom they should serve faithfully. The atman
being the same in all, it is meaningless to think of any particular person or
object as one’s own, like wife, children, or property. The jiva’s involvement
in samsara arises from its identiﬁcation with bodies generated by the gunas
of Prakriti. Knowledge of its real nature alone will put an end to its
entanglements. So long as there is perception of multiplicity, there will be
no freedom for the jiva, and the Lord’s power as time will terrorize it.
Uddhava then asked the Lord how the same atman can be called free yet
bound at the same time.
The Lord replied, “All talk of bondage and liberation is only in respect to
the body and the mind, which are products of the gunas and not of the
atman, which is one with me. The jiva and the atman are like two birds
sitting on the same tree. The former pecks at the fruit of the tree, enjoys the
sweet ones, discards the sour ones, and is continually swayed by its likes
and dislikes. It knows nothing and is bound by its strong desire for these
fruits. The other bird, the atman, though not eating the fruits yet thrives
splendidly on the same tree. The illumined person, though tenanting a body,
will have no identiﬁcation with it. The ignorant person, on the other hand,
equates himself with the body and thus has to suffer the pangs and pleasures
of it. The sage is not affected by the contact of the senses with their objects.
Though his senses function at peak level, yet he remains a witness, like the
sky or the sun or the wind. Though he has a body, he is free from the
domination of its urges. He remains unaffected whether his body is
persecuted or adored. He does not view experiences as being either
favorable or unfavorable. A person may be an adept in scriptural
knowledge, but if his mind is not absorbed in me through spiritual
disciplines, his literary efforts will be in vain, like one who keeps a barren
cow in the hope that it might yield milk.”
Then Uddhava asked who was the best type of sadhu and what was the
best type of devotion.
The Lord replied, “A sadhu is one who is kind, forbearing, and truthful.
He is unperturbed in joy and sorrow, ever helpful to all, with perfect
mastery over his senses. He is calm and nonattached, eats sparingly, and is
vigilant and courageous. Though he expects no respect from others, yet he
shows respect to all. Abandoning all other duties that might contribute to
his material welfare, he concentrates his entire energies on the practice of
wholehearted devotion to me. Even if one worships me with no knowledge
of my inﬁnity and majesty, with the feeling that I am his own and that he
has no other support, know him to be the greatest of all devotees. By this
type of devotion, generated through contact with holy men, many ignorant
beings in Vrindavana, like the cows, trees, animals, and gopis, attained me.
Of these, the gopis are the supreme example. J ust as the differentiation of
name and form ceases to exist in the minds of great sages when in samadhi
(superconscious state), just as rivers lose their individuality when their
waters mingle with the ocean, so also the gopikas, or gopis, of Vrindavana
lost their separate existence in me, lost the awareness of their kith and kin,
and even the awareness of their own bodies. Though ignorant of my real
nature as the Supreme Brahman, they attained me through the intensity of
their love.
“Therefore, O Uddhava, abandoning all reliance on scriptural injunctions
and prohibitions, the ways of work and renunciation, surrender your entire
being, body, mind, and soul to me, the all-comprehending and all-
comprehensive being, the essence within all embodied beings. By that alone
shall you attain liberation. My true devotees desire nothing, O Uddhava, not
even the state of an emperor, nor that of Brahma, nor heaven, nor the
attainment of yogic powers, nor even liberation. Their only hope, their only
goal is to attain me. Such devotees are supremely dear to me, O Uddhava.
They are dearer to me than my own self. I am always following the
footsteps of such sages so that all the worlds within me may get puriﬁed by
the dust of their holy feet. With universal love ﬁlling their hearts, they have
no wealth other than me, O Uddhava. Though my devotees may be under
the domination of the senses at the start of their spiritual life, yet with the
growth of devotion they will be able to overcome them. J ust as the ﬂaming
ﬁre reduces any type of fuel to ashes, so devotion to me destroys all the sins
that might prove an obstruction to their growth. Neither yoga, philosophy,
karma, Vedic study, austerity, nor renunciation has the power to attract me
as does intense bhakti.
“Those whose words falter with excessive joy when they speak of me,
whose hearts melt due to the overﬂowing tenderness of love for all beings,
who laugh at the thought of the mysterious workings of my maya, who
weep at the agony of separation from me, who care for nothing and nobody
but me, who have renounced their separate existence and are submerged in
thoughts of me, such people, O Uddhava, purify the three worlds just by
their existence. Rare indeed are such souls, O friend. If you see such a one,
worship him, for he is equivalent to me. The way to attain such an exalted
state is to think of me constantly, O Uddhava. J ust as the mind of a person
who always dwells on the sense objects becomes attached to them, so also
the mind of one who thinks of me constantly dissolves in me. Therefore,
whatever task you might be engaged in, mundane or sacred, let your mind
be constantly absorbed in me, as the lover’s mind on his beloved. Thus will
you become absorbed into me. This is the supreme secret I am imparting to
you, for you are supremely dear to me.”
F ortune is the attainment of my divine state. The greatest proﬁt
comes from devotion to me. Wisdom lies in the destruction of the
idea of the multiplicity of the self. Shame is the abhorrence of evil
deeds.
LORD KRISHNA, IN UDDHAVA GITA,
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
F ix  your mind on me, and you will surely be able to overcome all
obstacles by my grace, but if through egoism you refuse to listen to
me, you will perish.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Bhagavathaye Namaha!
3 2
Advice to Uddhava
Namosthute Mahayogin prapannamanushadi maam,
Yada thwaccharanambhoje rathi syadanapayini.
Salutations to thee, O Master Yogi! Thou art the one who confers
the fruits of striving on all yogis. Bless me, thy servitor who has no
other refuge, that I may have constant and unswerving attachment
for thy lotus feet.
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
Uddhava’s next question was on meditation, and the Lord answered him
fully. At the end of it, he warned Uddhava to beware of the siddhis, or
miraculous powers, that might accrue to the yogi. Deliberate cultivation of
such powers would act as obstacles and might well lead to the yogi’s
downfall, for the mind gets distracted by them and deﬂected from its main
purpose of attaining the Supreme. Uddhava then questioned him about the
vibhutis, or divine manifestations, just as Arjuna had done on the battleﬁeld.
The Lord gave him a similar answer and said that it would be easier to
count the atoms than give a complete list of his glories, since they were
inexhaustible.
Uddhava then questioned him about varnashrama dharma, or the duties
pertaining to one’s birth and station. After giving him a comprehensive
answer, the Lord concluded by saying that the dharma common to all
persons irrespective of caste and creed was to be free from all cruelty,
dishonesty, lust, anger, and greed and to do what was good and beneﬁcial to
all creatures.
Once again, Uddhava asked him to brieﬂy describe the nature of jnana
and bhakti.
The Lord replied, “Jnana, or knowledge, is that which sees the one
supreme consciousness alone, impregnating all creation from Brahma, the
creator, down to the smallest of his creations. When that permeating
substance is seen, to the exclusion of all changing modes, then that
understanding is known as jnana. I have already taught you what bhakti is,
but because of my love for you, I shall repeat it and also tell you how that
bhakti is generated. Recital of my names, steadiness in my worship,
diligence in the service of my devotees, remembrance of my presence at all
times, and utilization of all the senses in my service are the methods of
generating bhakti, O Uddhava. The senses have been given with a special
objective and that is to worship me, the Divine, in all things. The hands are
to be used to offer worship to me in the form of service to all creatures, the
eyes to discover my beauty in creation, the nose to smell my perfume in all
things, the ears to hear the sanctifying accounts of my glories, and the
tongue to taste the divinity in all food and to extol me through speech, song,
and hymn. All of creation provides both the method and the means for my
gloriﬁcation, leading to self-fulﬁllment. By constantly practicing such
disciplines, one can reach the state of complete self-surrender and obtain
deep-rooted and unmotivated devotion.”
Uddhava then asked him to explain the true meaning of the different
virtues such as charity, truth, valor, and so on. The Lord replied, “The
highest charity is to refrain from thinking ill of others and to refrain from
harming them and not the mere doling out of alms. Truth is to see God in
everything. Dharma is the greatest wealth. Heroism lies in the conquest of
one’s own mind and lower nature and not in the killing of enemies. The
greatest proﬁt is the attainment of devotion and not of wealth. True beauty
comes out of desirelessness and austerity and not through decoration of the
body. Hell is not a region but the dominance of the quality of tamas. The
greatest relation is the guru, and he is none other than the Lord. The
wealthy person is one who is rich in virtue, and the pauper is the greedy one
who is never satisﬁed whatever he might have. The house is the human
body, and its master is the one who is free from attachment to it. The slave
is the opposite. This, in brief, O Uddhava, is the description of the good and
bad, but know that real virtue lies in transcending these opposites.”
Immediately, Uddhava took him up on this statement, “The scriptures
teach us to distinguish between the two, so when you say that there is no
distinction, I am confused. Pray enlighten me.”
The blessed Lord replied, “Virtue and vice are determined by their
relevance to the spiritual advancement of humanity and not by anything
inherent in them. The system of determining actions and objects as good or
bad has been laid down in the scriptures in order to check humanity from
the pursuit of the animal instincts. Some of these rules are meant to help in
spiritual progress, and some are relevant for practical reasons. What is
described as good consists in adhering to the action and ways of living
within one’s spiritual and moral competency. The object of these rules is to
make one more introspective.
“They can apply only to certain situations, dictated by time and place.
What is right in one context can be wrong in another. For instance, not to
care for the home and family is wrong for the householder but right for the
sannyasi. An act that is a sin for a person of moral elevation need not be so
for a fallen person or for one in a low state of evolution who is ignorant of
rules. The person who is already fallen in the mud cannot have a further
fall. The fall is for one who is high up. The lesson to be learned from this
nonrigid nature of dharma and adharma is that people should come to
realize the impermanent nature of the external world, slowly try to retire
from the pursuit of material desires, and ﬁx their minds on the supreme
reality. To the extent that one is able to do this, to that extent one will be
free. If a person practicing sadhana (spiritual practice) happens to commit
something of a sinful nature, that sin should be burned by the power of
spiritual communion and not by the accepted code of penances.
“O Uddhava, this body is given for the purpose of attaining me. By
practicing the three yogas prescribed by me—jnana, karma, and bhakti—
one will be able to attain the highest, through this body alone. But one
should bear in mind that this body is mortal, so a person of discrimination
should strive constantly to realize the goal before being overtaken by death.
Birds may perch on a tree, but when they see that the tree is being felled,
they quickly change to another that is safe and unshakable.
“So also, the tree of life is ever being chopped down by that master
chopper, time. Before it is completely felled, those with wisdom will take
their seat at my feet, which is ﬁrm and unshakable. The frail barque of your
body may get wrecked by the mighty whales of anger, greed, and passion.
Attach yourself to me, therefore, and I shall take you across to the farther
shore. In the form of your guru, I shall come and be your captain, mark
your course, and set your compass in the right direction.”
Then Uddhava questioned him about the phenomenon of death, and the
Lord answered, “The mind, the ﬁve senses, and the tendencies derived from
karma constitute the linga sharira or karana sharira, or the subtle body.
This is what transmigrates from body to body. The mind of the dying man,
swayed by his own actions and their impressions, thinks intensely of the
outstanding experiences and attachments of his life. Consequently, he feels
that he has entered a new body that has manifested itself by the very
intensity of his thought. With the coming of the consciousness of the new
body, there is complete oblivion of the old one and its history. On account
of the intensity of attraction for the new body, the memory of the old one is
completely effaced.
“Death is the complete forgetfulness of the old body, and birth is the
complete identiﬁcation with the next body. How this happens can be
understood from the study of the dream state. In the dream state, the jiva
becomes completely oblivious of its waking body and gets identiﬁed with
its dream body. The ﬂames rising from a ﬁre and the water ﬂowing down a
stream are all being subjected to change, though we may not be aware of it.
So also, time is subjecting the bodies of all creatures to the aging process.
The atman is the witness to these changes of birth and death of the body,
but it is not subject to these processes.
“A man may observe a plant and note all its changes from sprout, to
sapling, to tree, and eventually its decay and degeneration, but he is totally
different from all these states. So also the atman is the knower of the body
and its transformations and not a partner to them. The one who is ignorant,
incapable of distinguishing the atman from the body, identiﬁes with it and is
swept into the cycle of births and deaths. If sattva is the predominating
quality at the time of death, the jiva gets the body of a sage or a god. If
rajas is the dominant element, it gets the body of an asura or a human
being, and if tamas is predominating, of a brute, or a disembodied spirit.
J ust as a person who witnesses a dance or a drama dances and sings and
laughs and weeps with the characters on the stage by identifying
intellectually with them, so also the jiva, though by nature actionless, is
drawn by the intellect to behave as if it were the body. J ust as the obsession
with dream experiences will remain with the sleeper as long as the dream
lasts, so also the experiences of samsara will continue until one is
awakened to the truth. Know well that it is only ignorance of the atman that
deludes the mind. So, however you might be subjected to abuse, insult,
ridicule, or calumny, do not allow yourself to be shaken from your
convictions. Remain calm within yourself and look on all these as being
only a product of your past karmas.”
As an example of this, the Lord told Uddhava the story of the mendicant
who suffered all types of ridicule and insults with an equal mind, for he
realized that it was but the result of the way he had treated people in the
past when he had been young and rich.
Thus goes the song of the mendicant: “The mind alone is the sole cause of
turning this mighty wheel of samsara. It is more powerful than all the
senses. The one who conquers it is the true hero. Without conquering or
making an effort to conquer this almost invincible enemy, who works with
unimaginable speed, the foolish person enters into vain quarrels with others,
regarding them as friends, enemies, or neutrals. The atman alone is the sole
reality, and the appearance of ‘ another’ is merely a ﬁgment of the mind’s
imagination. People blame their stars for their misfortunes. But how can the
stars affect the atman? They can only affect the body, and so only the one
who identiﬁes with the body can be affected by the stars and planets. The
atman is beyond all dualities. With whom, then, can one be angry? Does
one knock out one’s teeth because they happen to bite one’s tongue? It is
only the one who has not awakened to this truth who lives in fear of others.”
The Lord then continued, “This samsara, which produces happiness and
misery and distinguishes among friend, foe, and neutral, is entirely a
product of the mind. Therefore, O Uddhava, equipped with a mind that is
totally dedicated to me, put your best efforts into controlling the mind. This
is the sum and substance of all yoga.”
The Lord then spoke of the philosophy of creation and dissolution. “The
one pure consciousness, unmodiﬁed and beyond the comprehension of
thought and speech, becomes divided into two as the seer and the seen, the
subject and the object, as a consequence of the operation of my mysterious
power called maya. Of these two, one is Prakriti, the object, with its two
states of manifest and unmanifest, and the other is the Purusha, the center of
consciousness, the supreme subject. The jivas, lying submerged in Prakriti,
come into existence with their three aspects of sattva, rajas, and tamas due
to the urge of their karmic tendencies. All objects, big or small, are
permeated by their cause, the Purusha and Prakriti, from whom they have
sprung. This reality is the causal substance, which forms the very stuff of
these objects. The effects have no substantiality apart from their cause.
Brahman is the ultimate causal substance and therefore the ultimate reality.
Time is the factor that manifests this universe of effects, out of its causal
condition. All these three, Purusha, Prakriti, and time, are myself, the
Supreme Brahman. As long as the creative will of the Lord operates, this
continuous ﬂow of material energy is sustained, providing scope for the
jivas to enjoy and suffer, depending on their previous karma. When the
creative will subsides, then the process of dissolution, or Pralaya, sets in,
and this cosmic shell, in which innumerable universes arise and decay, is
invaded by myself, in my aspect as time, bringing about the dissolution of
all things into their causal condition. Reﬂect over these processes, O
Uddhava, and the delusion of your mind will vanish.”
The Lord next discussed the gunas and their effect on the mind. “All
things are constituted of the three gunas. The jiva goes round and round in
its transmigratory existence, according to the gunas it has been associated
with and the karma springing from them. The one who overcomes the
inﬂuence of these gunas and becomes securely established in me, through
devotion, becomes ﬁt for my state. So let a person who has attained this
human body, which is the means of spiritual enlightenment, abandon
attachments to the objects of material life and adore me and me alone.”
The Lord then warned Uddhava of the dangers of associating with those
whose minds are given over to sensual pleasures. He narrated the story of
King Pururavas, who was led to his downfall by his dalliance with the
heavenly nymph, Urvashi, and who eventually attained liberation by
associating with saints. The mind is easily swayed, and the company of holy
men leads it naturally to a holy life. “J ust as food is the life of all living
beings, so the holy person is the only relief for those who are sinking in the
sea of samsara. The sun can only give you objective vision to see external
objects, but the saints can give you spiritual insight.”
Uddhava then begged him to brieﬂy outline once more the three paths of
jnana, karma, and bhakti, as well as the method of ritualistic worship.
The blessed Lord replied, “Gold made into diverse ornaments or lying in
a lump by itself is still gold. Though the form changes, there is no change in
its essential nature. So also, know me to be the beginning, middle, and end
of all creation. If you would ﬁnd me through jnana, then you will not have
to seek far. From the highest Brahmin to the lowest chandala (casteless
person), from the creator Brahma to the smallest of his creations, it is I and
I alone. Discover me in everything and everybody. This is jnana. This is
wisdom. Realize the unity in the midst of diversity. The ability to ﬁnd out
the essence of everything is true intelligence. I, alone, shine in the heart of
the raindrop as well as in the mighty ocean. That one is the jnani, who
knows this and acts accordingly. Know him to be the pundit who perceives
and honors all beings as my manifestations, be they holy men or outcasts,
persecutors or protectors, the sun or a spark of ﬁre, a calm or a cruel person.
Overlooking the ridicule of friends and relatives, casting aside the sense of
high and low on mere physical considerations, throwing away all sense of
pride, one should prostrate before all beings, whether they be dogs,
outcasts, cattle, or donkeys, seeing all of them as manifestations of the
Supreme Being. This is true jnana.” Uddhava answered, “That is too
difﬁcult for me, O Lord, I see that what you say is true, but the mind is
weak, and I may not be able to put this jnana into practice. Knowledge
alone is not enough without the wisdom to practice it. Teach me a simpler
path.”
The blessed Lord replied, “Until the consciousness that all beings are my
manifestations has been assimilated by the mind, one should commune with
me through external worship and action. By doing this, a devotee gains that
knowledge by which he perceives everything as Brahman. Of all methods
of spiritual discipline, the best according to me is to practice seeing my
presence in everything, through the functioning of the three instruments of
the mind, speech, and action. This is the essence of the Bhagavata Dharma,
in which all actions are done as a dedication to me, without expectation of
their fruits. In this there is no waste of effort. Unlike rites performed with
desire for their beneﬁts, which would end in total failure if done improperly,
in this path, every act serves to help one’s spiritual evolution, if not in this
birth, then in another. The basis of these actions being spiritual, their effects
are imperishable. Even mundane actions like crying or running away, if
done as a dedication to me, come to have a spiritual potency. What need is
there, then, to speak of those high spiritual actions practiced consciously?
To reach me, the immortal, with the help of this mortal body is the wisdom
of the wise and the skill of the skillful. Thus, O Uddhava, do your work
after having dedicated the fruits of it to me, regardless of success or failure,
for when you have dedicated it to me, it is my duty to see that you get the
just results. The best advocate does not care whether his case is right or
wrong. His duty is only to place the facts before the judge. It is for the judge
to pass judgment. Therefore, let me be the judge of your actions.”
Then, in answer to Uddhava’s question about devotional methods, the
Lord gave him an elaborate account of those practices that are open to all.
At the end he concluded, “These are the many ways in which I may be
worshipped, O Uddhava, but the safe rule is to offer everything to me, as I
have already told you. But if you still wish to offer something particular,
remember that whatever is offered with love I will gladly accept. Be it a
leaf, a ﬂower, some fruit, or even water, if it is offered with love, I will be
immensely pleased. The best puja is that which is done without any desires,
for then I myself will decide what is best for the devotee. At the end of the
puja, you should renounce the sense of personal action and offer your very
soul, or atman, to me, and then the puja will purify you.”
Uddhava then asked, “What should I do if I am in the desert where not
even water is available? With what should I worship you then?”
The Lord smiled and said, “As long as the water in your eyes has not
dried up, my friend, do not fear. One drop from my devotee’s eyes is more
precious to me than the costliest diamond.”
Uddhava was overwhelmed when he heard this, and his eyes brimmed
with tears. For a few minutes, he could not utter a word. At last, he rallied
himself and asked still another question, not for himself but for the sake of
posterity.
“Even these things about which you have spoken may be too difﬁcult for
me, O Master!” he whispered. “I may not be able to go on a pilgrimage, I
may not be able to offer daily worship to you. The Age of Kali is at hand,
and people have short memories and short lives and no time to accomplish
anything. Give me, then, a shortcut that will lead me to you.”
Krishna smiled tenderly at him and replied, “Until my advent, O
Uddhava, an immersion in the Ganga was supposed to eradicate all sins, but
now an immersion in the holy story of my life is enough to cleanse the sins
of a thousand lifetimes. The ones who listen to the story of my life, who
narrate it or explain it to others, will sanctify themselves as well as their
listeners. If even this is too difﬁcult, O Uddhava, take a dip in the ﬂowing
river of my names. The chanting of my name alone is enough to attain
liberation. My names are not difﬁcult to learn like the Vedic mantras, which
are reserved for the favored few. They can be enjoyed and repeated by
anyone, regardless of birth or sex. Sweeter than honey is my name, giving
bliss to those who utter it, as well as those who hear it. It is the ripe, juicy
fruit of the Vedas. Like a calf following its mother, I myself will follow the
ones who call on my name, in order to see that no harm comes to them.
Thus listening to the tales of my life and chanting my names, you will
deﬁnitely be victorious over death itself. After studying this discourse, there
is nothing more for a spiritual aspirant to enquire about and understand, just
as after taking honey, there is nothing sweeter for one to drink.”
Being thus instructed by the Lord, Uddhava stood speechless for a while,
conscious of the great blessing that the holy one had bestowed on him. With
great effort, he controlled his mind, which had been overpowered by
emotion. His voice choking with surging waves of love and his eyes
overﬂowing with tears, he said, “When you have departed from these
mortal coils, O Lord, where will I ﬁnd you? Where will I seek for you?”
The holy one replied, “Go to my temples, O Uddhava! I will be residing
there. And if you are in any doubt as to where my temples are situated, I
will tell you. My temples are in the hearts of my devotees. Therefore, go
where my devotees congregate. Wherever you hear my names chanted and
my stories recited, there will I also be. Therefore, seek me among my
devotees, for through them I will ever manifest myself in this world.”
Uddhava remained silent and speechless with grief at the thought of the
imminent parting. The Lord looked at him with inﬁnite tenderness and
asked, “My beloved one, have I convinced you? Have you heard enough?
Are your doubts cleared?”
With sobs choking his voice and eyes brimming with tears, Uddhava
spoke, “O Supreme Preceptor! Your very proximity has removed my
delusion born of ignorance, just as a burning ﬁre dispels the darkness, cold,
and fear of those who sit next to it. You have lighted the lamp of knowledge
in the dark recesses of my mind. You have ignited the unquenchable ﬂame
of your Divine name in my heart. You have broken asunder my strong bond
of attachment to my kinsmen. You have permeated my entire being so that
nothing other than you exists for me anymore. What can I offer you, who
have given me my all? What gift can I place before you, who are the giver
of all gifts? Therefore do I place myself as an offering at your lotus feet, O
Lord. I have nothing else to give you.” So saying, he prostrated full length
before that soul of compassion, and catching hold of his lotus feet, he cried
out, “Prostrations to you, O Master Yogi. I have surrendered at your lotus
feet. I have no other refuge but you. Bless me with deep and undying
devotion to these, your feet. Wherever I may wander, whatever I may do, let
my mind run to you every second, every minute, and feel for you that love
that is eternal and indestructible.”
Uddhava lay on the ground like a fallen log, unable to rise up, unable to
do anything but bathe the Lord’s feet with his tears. The holy one laid his
hands ﬁrmly on the bowed head and blessed him. He then gently helped
him to rise up and gave his ﬁnal instruction to him. “O Uddhava, I direct
you to go to the famous place of pilgrimage in the Himalayas, known as
Badrikashrama, which is especially sanctiﬁed by my presence. There ﬂows
the river Alakananda, the very sight of which is purifying. Wear clothes
made of bark, subsist on roots and fruits, live without caring for the
extremes of climate, and put up patiently with all the adverse situations that
might confront you. Free from all desire for worldly enjoyments, ponder
deeply in solitude over that which I have taught you. With speech and
thought ever absorbed in me, live according to the dictates of the Bhagavata
Dharma I have taught you, and you will quickly pass through these material
realms and attain my transcendental state.”
Instructed thus by that holy one, Uddhava circumambulated his dearest
master and placed his head once more at his feet. Though his mind had
transcended the three gunas, the thought of leaving his beloved master and
going to Badrinath produced such waves of agony in his heart that it
expressed itself in torrential tears, which ﬂowed down his cheeks and
washed the Lord’s holy feet. With his mind stricken at the thought of the
imminent separation from his dearest Lord, he found it impossible to move
from that place and stood rooted to the spot, gazing piteously at that well-
loved face as if he could not bear to tear his gaze from it.
The Lord, understanding his predicament, spoke, “Dearer to me than my
sons, dearer to me than my wives are you, O Uddhava. For you are the
shining example of the jnana-bhakta. You have fettered me to yourself with
the bonds of your intense love;  yet the time has now come for our bodies to
part, for they are made of the ﬁve elements and must return to them. So go,
my faithful friend, and do as I have instructed you.”
Seeing Uddhava still reluctant, he continued, “In my previous incarnation
as Rama, when I had to part from my beloved brother, Bharata, I gave him
my footwear. Like you, he could not bear to be parted from me. Now I will
give them to you, my dear friend, for they have been attached to my feet,
the ultimate goal of all devotees. Take them, therefore, and proceed to
Badrikashrama, for I have no further use for them.”
Reverently, Uddhava accepted the precious gift. With tears streaming
from his eyes, he addressed them, “O divine paduka (sandals), do not think
too harshly of me for being the cause by which you have been forced to
separate from his lotus feet. Forgive me. Taste once more of the perfume of
those tender feet and then let us depart.”
So saying, he placed them once more tenderly beneath the Lord’s blessed
feet, and then holding them with great reverence on his head, he
circumambulated that Divine Presence once more. With eyes blinded by
tears, he tore himself away with many a backward glance. Only now did he
experience the bitter anguish suffered by the gopis of Vrindavana so many
years ago. When he turned around for the last time, he saw Krishna’s eyes
following him, and for the ﬁrst time, he saw a glimmer of tears in those
lustrous orbs. He ran back and fell at his feet once more. The Lord said
nothing, but gently placed his foot on Uddhava’s bent head, and thus passed
on to him the supreme wisdom. Then tenderly the Lord lifted up Uddhava’s
face, placed his lips on his forehead, and gently turned him round, toward
the direction in which he had to go. Uddhava was ﬁlled with an
inexpressible joy, and he felt replete. At the end of the path, he turned
around and saw the Lord, shining from afar, and heard gentle music playing
in the air. Up in the sky, he saw celestial beings folding their palms in
adoration. An ineffable peace stole into his heart as the beatiﬁc vision so
ﬁlled his being that he felt as if there were no differences between him and
Krishna. The divine beings were singing hymns in praise of him as well.
Without any conscious volition, and without feeling the heavy burden of his
body, Uddhava, the great bhakta, proceeded northward and reached the holy
shrine of Badrikashrama in the Himalayas. There he spent the rest of his
days in the manner prescribed by his dear master and thus attained to the
eternal abode.
Repeatedly recalling that most wonderful form of Krishna,
I  am ﬁlled with awe and I  rejoice over and over again.
SRIMAD BHAGAVAD GITA
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Vishvasmai Namaha!
3 3
T he Death of  the Deathless
Bhave bhave yada bhakti padayosthava jayathe,
Tada kurushva devesa, nathastvam no yatha prabho,
Namasamkeertanam yasya sarvapapavinashanam,
Pranami dukhashamanastwam namami Harim param!
O thou Lord and Master of all souls! Ordain that, however many
births we might have, we shall be endowed with devotion to your
feet. Salutations to that Supreme Hari, by chanting whose name
alone we will be freed from all sins, and by prostrating to whom
alone we will be saved from all misery.
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
Having given his ﬁnal advice to his dearest devotee, Uddhava, and through
him to all posterity, the Lord had accomplished all he had set out to do. He
waited calmly for the curtain to rise on the ﬁnal act of the mighty drama of
his life divine.
Dwaraka seemed to be in the throes of some mortal cancer that was
gnawing at its vitals and depleting its strength slowly but surely. The
citizens were trembling with fear ever since the sages had been insulted,
and a nameless dread held them in thrall. The once joyous and prosperous
city seemed to have sunk into gloom.
Day after day, strong winds blew from the ocean, and many were the evil
portents that were seen. The streets swarmed with rats, pots showed cracks,
cranes were heard to hoot like owls and goats to howl like wolves. Asses
were born out of cows and donkeys out of elephants. Kittens were fathered
by dogs and mice by mongooses. The sun, as it rose and set over the
doomed city, seemed to be encircled with the headless bodies of men. Then
the Yadavas, in their dread of the destiny that seemed to be inexorably
approaching them, went to the Lord. Krishna was waiting for them and
knew that the time had come for the words of Gandhari, uttered when she
was burning with grief at the death of her hundred sons, to be fulﬁlled. He
did not attempt to turn aside the course of destiny but rather set himself
calmly and cheerfully to make the path of events easy. He sent heralds
through the city to command the people to make a pilgrimage to the
opposite seacoast, to the holy spot of Prabhasa, where the river Saraswati is
supposed to ﬂow west. “Taking a purifying bath at Prabhasa, and observing
a fast there, we shall adore the gods and sages and perhaps avert the
danger,” he said.
All of them agreed to this proposal. They crossed the ocean in the boats
and traveled to Prabhasa in their chariots. They took all their provisions
with them, including a large store of wine and spirits. These had been
illicitly brewed, since the king had placed a ban on the making or drinking
of intoxicants. All types of costly viands and wines were carried by the vast
contingent of all the men of the city. Little did they realize as they set out
that they would never return. Only the Lord knew the character of the hour
and watched unmoved.
Having reached the coast, they went to the place of encampment in their
chariots and pitched their tents for a prolonged stay. As destiny had
ordained, the site chosen was close to the vast clump of erata grass, which
ﬂourished like swords on the shore. For some weeks, they followed the
advice of the Lord and engaged themselves in many holy rites and in
worship of the gods and sages, but soon, impelled by fate, as it were, they
stopped their worship and fasting and started feasting and carousing.
Surreptitiously at ﬁrst, and later with abandon, wine started to make its
appearance at the feasts and soon ﬂowed like water at all the banquets. The
reason for their pilgrimage was forgotten in the exuberance of the hour, and
the shores echoed and reechoed with the strains of revelry and music and
laughter. Plays, tournaments, and feasts took the place of worship, devotion,
and prayers.
Deprived of discrimination, they started to imbibe heavier and heavier
doses of the heady, sweet wine called maireya. A ﬁerce quarrel soon broke
out among those proud and haughty Yadava heroes, under the inﬂuence of
the powerful drink, augmented by the deluding effect of the Lord’s resolve.
A spark will cause a conﬂagration, if the timber is dry. It began with a word
said in drunken jest, some indiscreet reminiscences of the war that had been
fought long hence. Satyaki and Kritavarma had been on opposing sides,
since the main Yadava army had been given to Duryodhana, while a few of
Krishna’s close friends, like Satyaki, had chosen to ﬁght with the Pandavas.
Deluded by the liquor, Satyaki taunted Kritavarma, “Will any Kshatriya
attack and kill sleeping soldiers?” This was a reference to Kritavarma’s
blind following of Asvattama’s insane orders to destroy the remaining army.
“How dare you taunt me, when you slaughtered the great Bhurisravas
when he was seated in yoga!” shouted the enraged Kritavarma.
Soon, the other Yadavas joined the fray, taking sides with one or the other,
and it was but a matter of moments before they proceeded from words to
blows. In a few moments, the scene of revelry had turned into a ﬁeld of
slaughter. Kith and kin stood ranged against each other. Son killed sire, and
sire killed son. The Yadavas, having reached the day of their doom, rushed
upon death, like moths to the ﬂame. Not one of them thought of ﬂight.
“Here’s the end of the coward who kills sleeping children,” said Satyaki
and fell upon Kritavarma and cut off his head.
Kritavarma’s supporters immediately fell upon Satyaki. Pradyumna
rushed to his defense, and in the ensuing fray, both were killed. Maddened
by liquor and driven by destiny, they were intent on killing one another and
fought with bows and arrows, swords and maces, spears and javelins. With
the banners of chariots, cavalry, and infantry ﬂuttering, and seated on
various kinds of mounts like bulls, buffaloes, and donkeys, they confronted
one another like maddened elephants in the forest, causing mutual
destruction.
A prey to delusion, the great Yadava heroes fought with each other, totally
oblivious of their kinship. Sons with fathers, brothers with brothers, uncles
with nephews, grandfathers with grandsons, friends with friends, and
relatives with relatives, all intent on self-destruction. When their weapons
and arrows were exhausted, their bows broken and maces shattered, they
plucked the erata reeds with their bare ﬁsts. These became hard as adamant
in their hands, and they charged at each other’s throats, armed with these
swords of destiny. The Lord alone stood calmly in the midst of the fray and
watched in silence as his deluded kinsmen destroyed one another. The
maddened men now charged at him and Balarama too, so the two of them
picked up the swordlike reeds and used them to deadly effect. Cursed by the
holy men and deluded by the Lord’s maya, the ﬂames of their anger, ignited
by a spark said in a jest, were enough to burn up the entire race of the
Yadavas. It was like a ﬁre generated by the mutual friction of the bamboo
trees that consumes the entire grove.
The sound of the strife died away into silence as one by one the mighty
heroes fell, victims of their own wrath. The scene of revelry had changed to
a ghastly slaughterhouse. The strong and bright and beautiful Yadava clan
had come to an end. Balarama now sat on the shore lapped by the white
waves. He went into a trance, and a stream of light issued from his forehead
like a silver serpent and coiled its way up to the skies.
At Hastinapura, Arjuna suddenly felt as if Krishna were calling him.
When he lay down to sleep, he thought he saw the beauteous form of the
Lord gently smiling at him.
The Lord said tenderly, “Arjuna, do you remember my telling you that
everything in this world is born to serve a purpose? This is the case even
with me. Arjuna, I have come to tell you that the purpose of my life has
been fulﬁlled. I’m going. Soon you will follow me.” So saying, the vision
vanished from his sight. Arjuna jumped up, pale and trembling, ﬁlled with
dread.
The Lord could have easily given up his breath in a yogic trance, as
Balarama had done, but he was playing the role of a man, and he had to act
in accordance with the rules of the game.
Knowing that the time for his own exit had come, he returned to the city
and called upon his father to assume the direction of affairs and keep the
women of the Vrishnis under his protection until the arrival of Arjuna from
Hastinapura. Krishna prostrated at his father’s feet and turned to leave his
presence. A loud wail of sorrow broke out from the women of his
household. Hearing this, the merciful Lord retraced his steps, and smiling
on them for the last time, he said gently, “Arjuna will come and take you to
Hastinapura. All your needs will be met by him.”
Saying this, he departed from the palace and made his way to the forest.
Never again was his form, as Krishna, seen in this world, which he had left
behind. Reaching the hidden depths of that dense forest, he sat silently
beneath an asvattha tree and established himself on a superconscious plane.
Restraining all his senses, he drew in his perceptions and steadied his mind
on the Supreme Brahman, his own self! Wrapped in the impenetrable
mantle of self-communion, his form was wonderful to behold, illumining all
the surroundings with his luster, like a ﬁre without heat or smoke. Blue like
a rain cloud, shining like molten gold, sporting the Shrivatsa, adorned with
shining ﬁsh-marked earrings, girdle, diadem, bracelets, anklets, and
necklaces, his neck encircled by the vanamala, he sat in a yogic trance,
resting his lotus-pink left foot on his right thigh, waiting for the last part of
the prophecy to be fulﬁlled.
A hunter called J ara had the remaining piece of the iron pestle from the
ﬁsherman and had made it into an arrowhead. In the gloom of the forest, he
mistook the holy foot of the Lord for the face of a deer and shot the fateful
arrow at it. Running up to retrieve his prey, he beheld the glowing visage
and knew him to be divine. Filled with remorse, he threw himself at the
Lord’s feet and burst into sobs. The Lord opened his lotus-petal eyes for the
last time, smiled upon his slayer, and blessed and comforted him. The ﬁrst
liberation he had given in his avatara as Krishna had been to Putana, the
wicked witch who had come to kill the baby Krishna with her poisoned-
tipped breasts, and the last one was given to the poor hunter boy who had
shot him with a poison-tipped arrow. It is said that J ara had been Vali in his
previous birth, whom Sri Rama had shot from behind a tree. Thus in this
birth he was given a chance to retaliate. This time it was the Lord who was
the victim and J ara the one who shot him from behind the tree!
J ara cried, “O Lord of Vaikuntha! Deign to pardon this misbegotten
wretch who has done this crime in ignorance. Kill me soon, hunter of wild
animals that I am, so that I may never more commit such terrible crimes!
Even the gods fail to understand the mystery of your creation. How then can
a most ignorant and humble hunter like me understand the purpose of your
divine lila?”
The blessed Lord said, “O J ara! Do not entertain any fear. Arise and be
blessed, for it is only due to my own resolve that you had acted thus, and
you shall precede me to my divine abode of Vaikuntha. You shall go to that
world where men go, who have done great and noble deeds.”
Commanded by the Lord, J ara ascended the divine vehicle that had come
to fetch the Lord, and he, too, attained to the celestial abode.
The last one to see the Lord in his body as Krishna was Daruka, his
charioteer. By following the fragrance of his vanamala made of ﬁve wild
ﬂowers leaves, he had traced him to the place where he was seated. He
beheld his Lord and master beneath the asvattha tree surrounded by his
luminous weapons, glowing with a divine radiance. At this sight, Daruka
rushed toward him, overﬂowing with love. Falling at his feet, he said,
“Having lost track of you, O Master, I have been wandering in the
wilderness like a lost soul, like one caught in the darkness of the night after
the moon has set. I have lost all sense of direction. I know not where to go
or what to do.”
The Lord said to him, “O Daruka! Proceed to Dwaraka and inform all
those who remain there that I have abandoned my earthly body. Tell
everyone to evacuate the city immediately;  for seven days from now, it will
submerge in the ocean. All of them with their families, as well as my
parents and wives, should go to Hastinapura, under the protection of
Arjuna, who will come for them. After giving this message, you should
proceed straightaway to Hastinapura and tell Arjuna everything. Ask him to
accompany you back to Dwaraka and escort the women and children back
to Hastinapura. As for you, O charioteer, remember that I am the Divine
Charioteer seated in the heart of every human being. Follow the Bhagavata
Dharma that I have expounded. Knowing the whole universe to be but an
expression of my maya, leave the reins of your life in my hands and remain
at peace.”
Instructed thus by the Lord, Daruka circumambulated him again and
again and prostrated before him, placing his head under the lotus feet. He
returned sorrowfully to Dwaraka, as bid by his dear master. Then the sky
became ﬁlled with the celestials who had come to see the ﬁnal act of the
drama of the Lord’s life in this world. J ust as mysterious as the divine birth
is the divine death. Inexplicable is his maya, which brings into existence
that which is ever existent and once again gives an appearance of having
ceased to exist. Birth and death are but the two sides of the coin of creation.
They have no meaning when applied to the Creator.
As at the time of the advent, the sky was covered with a pearly light, the
air was ﬁlled with music, and the gods thronged to witness this unique
event. Beholding them who were but manifestations of his own power, Sri
Krishna’s wondrous eyes, ﬁlled with the knowledge of eternity, glowing
with a love that was boundless, overﬂowing with compassion for all
creation, closed gently, like a lotus closing its petals for the night. His
world-enthralling form, the most auspicious object for meditation, glowed
with an unearthly light and melted into the elements, before the wondering
eyes of the celestials.
J ust as one beholding a ﬂash of lightning speeding beyond the expanse of
clouds cannot trace its course, so the divinities failed to trace the Lord’s
path as he vanished from the earthly scene. Kettledrums boomed and
showers of ﬂowers fell on the place where he had been sitting. As the gods
made salutations, the sages came and worshipped the spot where he had sat.
They wondered at the fact that he, who had the power to create, preserve,
and dissolve this world, did not choose to allow his own body to remain
after the destruction of his clan. Perhaps he wanted to demonstrate that this
mortal body has no ultimate value, and the way of those established in
Brahman is to let it fall without regret, after it has served its purpose.
Thus was the last scene enacted of that unique life. But though the bottle
might be broken, the perfume of the essence within can never be destroyed.
It lingers on for all eternity in the hearts of his devotees, for it is the
perfume of a life that was divine, the life of the inﬁnite, eternal, unborn one,
the Lord Narayana himself, who took on the burden of this mortal life, in
order to bring joy and liberation to the countless generations that have come
after him. Aum Namo Narayanaya!
Having parted from Krishna, Daruka repaired to Dwaraka, prostrated before
Vasudeva and Ugrasena, and drenched their feet with his tears. He then
gave a full account of the total destruction of the Vrishnis. All of them were
stunned. Weeping and beating their breasts at the thought of the Lord’s
demise, they went to the place where their kith and kin were all lying dead.
Unable to bear the separation from their beloved sons, Devaki, Rohini, and
Vasudeva gave up their lives. Rukmini and several of the other wives of
Krishna entered into the ﬂames of the funeral pyre, concentrating their
minds on the Lord alone.
Daruka hurried to Hastinapura and gave the news to Arjuna. He returned
with Arjuna, who was grief-stricken when he heard the news and witnessed
the scene of devastation. He attended to the proper obsequies of all. Seven
days after the Lord’s departure, the ocean swept away the last vestiges of
that once prosperous city of Dwaraka. Only a few people remained to tell
the tale. “The sea, which had been beating against the shores, suddenly
broke the boundary that was imposed on it by nature. The sea rushed into
the city. It coursed through the streets of the beautiful city.
“The sea covered up everything in the city. Arjuna saw the beautiful
buildings becoming submerged one by one. He took a last look at the
mansion of Krishna. In a matter of a few moments it was all over. The sea
had now become as placid as a lake. There was no trace of the beautiful
city, which had been the favorite haunt of all the Pandavas. Dwaraka was
just a name;  just a memory” (description from the Mahabharata).
After this, he sorrowfully started his journey back to Hastinapura with the
remaining women and children.
In Hastinapura, Yudhishtira was already full of foreboding as he waited
for his brother to return, and when he saw Arjuna’s face, his deepest fears
were conﬁrmed. With a trembling voice, he asked after the welfare of their
dear ones at Dwaraka.
For a few minutes Arjuna was unable to speak a word. At last, revolving
in his mind the Lord’s various acts of love and compassion toward him, he
began to speak in a voice choked with emotion. Recalling all his great acts
of skill, he came to the conclusion that none of them would have been
possible had it not been for the guiding hand of his dear Lord beside him.
“O King,” he said, “all those about whom you have made kind enquiries
are no longer in the land of the living. Only four or ﬁve of our friends are
surviving. J ust as the body, even if it be of a dear person, becomes repulsive
when life has ﬂown out of it, so also this world has become repulsive to me,
because my beloved friend has left it. My prowess, which was once the
wonder of even the gods, has vanished, and my heart is spiritless and weak
because of the absence of that great one, my dearest friend and well-wisher.
You will not be able to believe this, but I have met with defeat at the hands
of a few wretched herdsmen as I was bringing the women from Dwaraka, as
he had wanted me to do. The same bow, the same arrows, and I, the same
warrior, before whom even heroes bowed in submission. But today, alas,
lacking the presence of the Lord behind me, all of them have been reduced
to utter futility, like sacriﬁcial offerings poured into ashes or seeds sown in
a desert. Now I understand that it was by his grace alone that I was able to
do everything—to defeat the kings at Draupadi’s swayamvara and to cross
the limitless ocean of the Kaurava armies. Sitting beside me as my
charioteer and moving skillfully in front of the enemy army made up of
great warriors, like Bhishma, Drona, and Karna, he took away their lives by
a mere look. It was by his protection alone that I was not even scratched by
the mighty weapons hurled at me by Karna, Salya, J ayadratha, and others.
O King! My heart burns when I recall how he used to joke with me, bathing
me in his brilliant and charming smile, how he gave me his immortal
teaching on the battleﬁeld, and how he showed me his mighty cosmic form,
which has rarely been shown to others. How patiently he bore with my
sarcastic and stupid remarks! My only solace now is to remember that
glorious advice he has given me and try to follow it, but my heart is heavy
indeed within me, and I would fain depart from this world, which has lost
all savor for me.”
Hearing this, Yudhishtira and the other Pandavas were also sunk in
gloom. They lost all interest in life and decided to prepare for their ﬁnal
journey. It is said that the Kali Yuga, or the Iron Age, began from the day
that the Lord departed from this Earth. Yudhishtira made arrangements for
the continuation of the Yadava and Kuru dynasties and the well-being of his
people. At Mathura, he enthroned Vajra, the only surviving grandson of
Krishna, as the king of the Surasenas. Parikshit, the only surviving
grandson of the Pandavas, was now crowned emperor at Hastinapura, and
Subhadra and Yuyutsu were left to look after his interests, with Kripa as his
preceptor. Then the Pandavas, together with Draupadi, discarded their royal
insignia and clad themselves in deerskin and bark and left the city without
any regrets.
They proceeded ﬁrst to Dwaraka and saw the city completely submerged
in water. It appeared to them as if the spirits of their friends were beckoning
to them from the water. Suddenly Agni, the god of ﬁre, appeared before
them and said to Arjuna, “I obtained the Gandiva and the quiver of arrows
from Varuna, the lord of the waters. Return them, therefore, to him, as their
purpose has been served.”
Arjuna came forward and, standing on the shore, hurled far into the ocean
his priceless bow, the Gandiva, and the two inexhaustible quivers. The
ocean rose up with a roar and swallowed them up.
The Pandavas now decided to do a circumambulation of the holy land of
Bharatavarsha before retiring to the Himalayas to practice austerities in the
mountains and perhaps to meet Uddhava at Badrikashrama. So they went to
the extreme east, then traveled to the southern tip, then proceeded
northward along the western coast, thus circumambulating the entire holy
land, the birthplace of that holy one.
At last they reached the mighty Himalayas, the home of meditating souls.
There they saw the majestic snow peaks and beyond that, Meru, the
mountain of the gods. At this stage, a wild-looking dog and a noble buffalo
joined the party. The buffalo was a form taken by Lord Shiva, and they gave
chase to him and eventually he allowed himself to be caught. The animal
came apart into ﬁve pieces in their hands. They threw the pieces in different
spots, and the places where they fell came to be known as the Pancha
Kedars, the ﬁve important Shiva temples in the Himalayas. Then they
proceeded to climb up toward Badrikashrama, where the Lord had told
Uddhava that he could be found. They walked in a single ﬁle, with
Draupadi bringing up the rear and the dog behind. As they journeyed on,
with faces set toward their goal beyond Badrikashrama, all the errors of
their lives began to bear fruit, and one by one they fell. The ﬁrst to collapse
was Draupadi. Yudhishtira kept walking without faltering. The others stood
rooted, and Bhima asked his older brother why the faultless Draupadi had to
fall before they had reached heaven. Yudhishtira replied that it was because
she always had a partiality for Arjuna. A little later, Sahadeva collapsed,
and Yudhishtira explained to Bhima that he was too vain of his wisdom.
Then Nakula fell, and Yudhishtira said that he had been too proud of his
physical beauty. Then came Arjuna’s turn, and Yudhishtira’s explanation
was that he had been too conceited about his valor. With his last ounce of
waning strength, Bhima tried to keep pace with his brother, but soon even
he staggered and fell. Yudhishtira explained that his weakness lay in his
boasting about his physical strength and his glaring fault had been gluttony.
Hardly looking back, Yudhishtira continued his painful steps forward,
followed by the dog. Suddenly, there was a deafening peal of thunder, and
Indra appeared in his chariot. He asked Yudhishtira why he had not stopped
to render aid to his fallen wife and brothers.
Yudhishtira replied, “One progressing toward perfection should not look
back with attachment at what is being naturally relinquished. This mortal
body is to be shed. The immortal self alone is to be realized. I am in the
search of that self and can no longer be detained by these mortal bodies.”
Indra spoke, “The immortal self of your brothers and your wife have
preceded you to heaven. But it is ordained that you shall have the unique
privilege of entering heaven in your physical form. Therefore, you may
ascend this chariot.”
As Yudhishtira got into the chariot, the faithful dog ran after him, but
Indra forbade it from entering the chariot and told Yudhishtira that there
was no place in heaven for a dog.
Yudhishtira replied, “If there is no place for it, there is no place for me
either. Never in this life will I desert one who has shown me devotion nor
one who has sought my protection, nor one who is too weak to protect
himself. Therefore, I would rather abandon heaven than abandon this poor
creature.”
Indra cajoled, “Wherefore, O King, are you so foolish? You have
renounced Draupadi and your brothers. Why should you not renounce this
dog?”
The king replied, “I did not abandon my brothers and my wife as long as
they were alive. I renounced only their corpses, which could not be revived.
It is against the code of dharma to abandon a dependent. Therefore do I
reject your heaven!”
As he ﬁnished speaking, the dog vanished, and in his place appeared the
radiant god of righteousness, Yamadharma, who was his father! “Hail, O
Yudhishtira,” he said, “you have renounced the very abode of the celestials
on behalf of a dog! Verily there is none equal to you in heaven.”
Flowers rained from above on the head of this greatest of all mortals,
Yudhishtira the just, Yudhishtira the great, as he got into the car of glory
surrounded by the chariots of the gods, and ascended to heaven in his
mortal frame. Looking around him, he could see neither his brothers nor his
wife. Instead, he saw Duryodhana and his brothers looking resplendent like
suns. Turning to Indra he said, “I will not stay in this place, however happy
it may be. I must go where Draupadi and my brothers reside.”
He was now escorted to a dark and polluted region, infested with stinging
insects and beasts of prey. It was a place ﬁlled with dread. The attendants of
Indra who were escorting him now spoke, “Thus far and no farther, O King,
can we come with you. We have to go back, but you may also return with us
if you so wish.”
His mind stupeﬁed with the noxious vapors and sunk in gloom, the king
stood, not knowing what to do. J ust then, he heard the moaning voices of
his brothers and his wife, begging him to stay, since the very sight of his
blessed form brought relief to their tortured spirits.
The king pondered for a minute. “Duryodhana and the Kauravas in
heaven and my poor brothers in hell! What justice is there in the universe?
For this crime I shall abandon the very gods themselves! Go!” he said to the
guide. “Go to the gods who sent you, and tell them that Yudhishtira will not
return to that place of felicity. I shall abide here where my brothers suffer
and where my presence brings some measure of comfort to them.”
The messenger bowed his head and swiftly passed out of sight. The king
stood alone in that vast and dreadful gloom, brooding over this strange
inversion of justice. Not more than a moment passed when a cool and
fragrant breeze began to blow, and the repulsive sights vanished.
Yudhishtira, raising his head, found himself surrounded by the radiant
beings of heaven.
“These torturous experiences, O King,” they said, “have ended. Now
ascend to your own place. Hell must be at least glimpsed by every king,
however noble he might be. Happy are they whose good deeds overpower
their bad, for then they suffer ﬁrst for a short time and then enjoy. It is the
reverse for the wicked, who enjoy the beneﬁts of their few good deeds ﬁrst
and then are cast into hell for the duration of their stay in these regions. The
Kauravas will experience heaven for a short while, for the Lord had
promised Karna that all those who fell on the battleﬁeld of Kurukshetra
would go to heaven. After this, they will have to suffer in hell for their sins
before attaining another birth. To you and your brothers, O Yudhishtira, hell
has been shown for only a short time. Come then, O royal sage! Here is the
heavenly Ganga. Take a plunge in its purifying waters and cast off your
human body, together with your grief. O thou of never-ending glory! Rise
up and join the rest of your kinsmen and Draupadi in those blessed regions
where they already dwell.”
Thus ends the story of the Pandavas, who were so greatly loved by the
Lord that he was prepared to sacriﬁce his own integrity to save them from
infamy, himself shouldering the blame for all the adharmic acts of the
Mahabharata war so as to safeguard them who had surrendered their all to
him. Though tested to the utmost both in heaven and on Earth, the Pandavas
transcended the frailties of their humanity and rose to the sublime heights of
their divinity due to his grace alone, thus providing a unique lesson,
inspiring the generations to follow in times to come.
The nectar of your sin-effacing utterances brings life and hope to
those scorched by misery. They are ex tolled by wise sages, and the
mere listening to them would bestow auspiciousness on all—
they
confer every prosperity. Those who spread them are verily
magnanimous, for they give that which is completely satisfying to
their listeners.
SRIMAD BHAGAVATAM
Hari Aum Tat Sat
Aum Lila Manushavigrahaya Namaha!
E PIL O GUE
L ila— T he C osmic Play
Yo leelalasya samlagno,
Gatho alolopi lolatham,
Tam leelavapusham baalam,
Vande leelartha siddhaye.
I bow to the playful form of that child who has incarnated himself
to fulﬁll the cosmic purpose and who, though completely
uninvolved, gives the appearance of being totally involved in the
dance-drama of his own creation.
Why does the Brahman, the immutable, the eternal, the ineffable, manifest
himself? Why and how does the nondual become dual? Advaita proclaims
that duality is only an illusion. All is maya. Brahman alone exists. That
alone is nitya (eternal). All else is mithya (transitory). Once That is realized,
the world of dualities will cease to exist.
The Puranas, however, give a sweeter explanation. Lord Narayana is the
Uttama Purusha (supreme person), equivalent to Brahman, and this creation
is his lila, his play, the cosmic game. He is pictured as lying on his serpent
couch, with his consort Lakshmi sitting at his feet, with eyes half closed,
immersed in bliss. From this abode of peace, he decides to incarnate himself
in order to enjoy his own creation. He takes on many incarnations, but his
incarnation as Krishna is the exciting climax—a burst of joyful laughter, as
it were, exploring the frailties and beauties of his own creation, admiring its
grandeur, plumbing the heights and depths of its meaning, sometimes
ﬂouting his own laws and sometime obeying, for he is the Purushottama,
the Supreme Being, who possesses both the immutable unity and the mobile
multiplicity. Lord Narayana is sat-chitananda (existence-knowledge-bliss),
and his incarnation as Krishna is the expression of his ananda, or bliss.
Because of it, all creation is possible— because of his play, his delight, and
his sweetness. Krishna is the incarnate divinity of love. He is the essence of
the love of the Divine for the Divine;  for the jiva is also divine, and only the
Divine is capable of loving the Divine with a love that is also divine.
Krishna is the Supreme’s eternal, inﬁnite, immortal self-play, self-issuing,
self-manifesting, and self-ﬁnding. The blue boy of Vrindavana is the Lord
descended into the world-play from the divine ananda. The call of his ﬂute
seeks to transform the lower, ignorant drama of mortal life into this divine
ananda. Those who are deaf to this enchanting call of love may be forced to
listen to the crack of the whip at Kurukshetra, but to the seer, that is only
another aspect of his love. If he appears to break the established human
molds, it is only to create new molds from higher planes, and for this, he
has to shock the sleeping mind of humanity in order to change, liberate, and
divinize it. He is perfect love and perfect beauty, giving rise to perfect
delight—the complete revelation of sat-chit-ananda in a mortal frame.
If this is Krishna, then what about the jivas? Why and how did they
manifest? Are they not divine and therefore part of the game? Why, then, do
they not realize that it is a game? Why do they have to suffer and sin and
laugh and cry? Why does the beggar not realize that he is in truth the
divinity, clothed in tatters? The Puranas declare that the whole of life is
indeed the lila of the Lord, in which he himself is the hero and the villain,
the actor and the audience, the director and the producer, the song and the
silence, and even the very stage on which the drama is enacted. It is by a
large mobilization of his Prakriti, his energy, his will and power, that he
manifests himself in all this multiplicity. But then the question arises as to
why he allows himself to get caught in the web of his own creation? Can
the spider be trapped in its own web? The explanation is simple. The best
actors are those who can completely immerse their private lives in the
personality of the character they are portraying. So also in the cosmic
drama, the supreme actor has to forget his true nature and allow himself to
be caught in the web of his own maya, if he is to completely and
satisfyingly enact the different roles. He becomes the king on the throne and
the beggar in the street, the murderer about to be hung and the victim lying
in a pool of blood, as well as the judge pronouncing judgment in the court.
He is the solo actor, the sole enjoyer, the only experiencer, oblivious of his
divine origin, submerged in the role. He is playing—laughing, crying,
dancing, singing, living, and dying.
The avatara comes to free the jiva from this complicated web of divine
origin and enable it to realize its own nature. Fortunate are those who
happen to catch the lilting strains of his sweet music emanating from his
magic ﬂute. For them, the mundane world ceases to charm, and like the
gopis of Vrindavana, they run in rapture to that enchanter in the forest,
forgetting everything, spellbound by the form of that Lord of love and
beauty—Shyamasundara-Manamohana-Vanamali! Advaita seeks for the
indeﬁnable existence, beyond personalities, but the devotee of Krishna sees
in him that indeﬁnable personality. By adoring him and by union with him,
the jiva can come to enjoy its own divine status. This is the promise made
by him to Uddhava and Arjuna. Only then does the beggar realize that he
was, in truth, the king who had taken on the role of the mendicant. Then,
the cosmic drama comes to a close, the curtain falls, and the actor-director-
audience remains in blissful, enraptured consciousness of himself as sat,
chit, and ananda.
This is the cosmic play—the play of God—inexplicable, tantalizing
adorable.
Samarpanam at the lotus feet of Vanamali—the producer and director and
sole actor of the whole drama.
Hari Aum Tat Sat
APPE NDIX  O NE
Alphabetical L ist of  Mantras
The mantras that open and close every chapter of this book have been listed
here in alphabetical order to facilitate location of their translations.
Aum Achyuthaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to the one who never falls from
his true nature
Aum Sri Anandaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the one who is pure bliss
Aum Anantanaamaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the one with inﬁnite names
Aum Anantarupaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the one with inﬁnite forms
Aum Sri Balagopalaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to baby Krishna
Aum Bhagavathaye
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the blessed one
Aum Bhaktavalsalaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the lover of his devotees
Aum Bharthaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to the one who governs all
beings
Aum
Bhishmamuktipradayakaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to him who granted liberationto
Bhishma
Aum Damodaraya Namaha!   Obeisance to the one with a rope aroundhis
waist
Aum Dharmakrite Namaha!   Obeisance to him who is the foundation of
righteousness
Aum Dwarakanathaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the Lord of Dwaraka
Aum Ganeshaya Namaha
  Salutations to Lord Ganesha
Aum Gopalaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to the cowherd boy
Aum Gopathaye Namaha!
  Obeisance to the husband of Earth
Aum Govindaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to the protector of all living
beings
Aum Sri Gurave Namaha!
  Obeisance to the guru
Aum Haraya Namaha!
  Obeisance to him who destroys all sins
Aum Hrishikeshaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the Lord of the senses
Aum J agadeeshvaraya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the God of the universe
Aum J agannathaya Namaha!   Obeisance to the Lord of the universe
Aum J agatgurave Namaha!
  Obeisance to the preceptor of the universe
Aum J anardanaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to the one who removes the
evils of birth and death
Aum Kaalatmane Namaha!
  Obeisance to the spirit of time
Aum Kamalanathaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the husband of Lakshmi
Aum Sri Krishnaya
Paramatmane Namaha!
  Obeisance to Krishna, the Supreme Soul
Aum Lila
Manushavigrahaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to him who has taken a form for
sport
Aum Madhavaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to the Lord of all knowledge
Aum Mathuranathaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the Lord of Mathura
Aum Mukundaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to the giver of liberation
Aum Namashivaya
  Salutations to Lord Shiva
Aum Nandakumaraya
  Obeisance to the son of Nanda
Namaha!
Aum Narayanaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to him who is the ﬁnal refuge
Aum Navaneethanadaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the one who plays with butter
Aum Nirvanaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to the ever liberated one
Aum Parthasarathaye
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the charioteer of Arjuna
Aum Purushottamaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the Supreme Person
Aum Sarvapaalakaaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the one who looks after all
creation
Aum Sarveshvaraya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the Lord of Lords
Aum Satchidanandaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to him who is existence-
knowledge-bliss
Aum Satthwatham Pathaye
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the Lord of the Sattwathas
Aum Sri Shukabrahmarishe
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the sage Shuka
Aum Shyamasundaraya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the handsome dark one
Aum Sri Krishna
Dwaipayanaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to the sage Vyasa
Aum Sri Krishnaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to Lord Krishna
Aum Sri Krishnaya
Parabrahmane Namaha!
  Obeisance to Lord Krishna, the Supreme
Brahman
Aum Srinivasaya Namaha!
  Obeisance to the abode of auspiciousness
Aum Sri
Tulasidhamabhushanaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the one who is adorned with
a garland of tulsi leaves
Aum Vaasudevaya Namaha!   Obeisance to the one who resides in all
beings
Aum Vande Mataram
  Hail to the Motherland
Aum Vanamaline Namaha!
  Obeisance to the one who wears a garland
of wildﬂowers
Aum Venunadasharadaya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the one who is an expert
ﬂautist
Aum Vishnave Namaha!
  Obeisance to Vishnu, the all-pervading one
Aum Vishvasmai Namaha!
  Obeisance to him in whom the universe is
established
Aum Yogeeshwaraya
Namaha!
  Obeisance to the Lord of yogis
Hari Aum Tat Sat
  Everything is the will of the Supreme Hari
(Krishna)
APPE NDIX  T W
O
L ist of  C haracters
Abhimanyu
  Arjuna’s son by Subhadra
Achyuta
  A Name of Vishnu/ Krishna
Adhiratha
  Karna’s foster father
Adishesha
  Name of the serpent on which Lord Vishnu reclines
Aditi
  Indra’s mother, mother of the gods
Aditya
  Name of the sun
Agha
  Demon in the form of a python
Agni
  God of ﬁre
Ajatashatru
  Literally, “one without enemies”;  a name of
Yudhishtira
Akrura
  Krishna’s uncle
Amba
  Princess of Kashi, who reincarnated as Shikhandin
Ambalika
  Princess of Kashi, married to Vichitravirya
Ambika
  Princess of Kashi, mother of Dritarashtra
Aniruddha
  Krishna’s grandson
Anuvinda
  Brother of Krishna’s wife Mitrabinda
Arishta
  Demon in the form of an ox
Arjuna
  Third of the Pandava brothers
Asvattama
  Son of Drona
Asti
  One of the wives of Kamsa
Ashvini
Kumaras
  Divine physicians
Bahulashva
  King of Mithila
Baka
  Demon in the form of a crane
Balarama
  Brother of Krishna, incarnation of Adishesha
Bana
  Demon king;  father of Usha
Banu
  One of Krishna’s sons
Bhadra
  One of Krishna’s wives
Bhagadatta
  Son of Narakasura
Bhanumati
  Duryodhana’s wife
Bhauma
  Another name for Narakasura, demon king killed by
Krishna
Bhima
  Second of the Pandava brothers
Bhishma
  Son of Shantanu and Ganga, great-grandsire of the
Pandavas and Kauravas
Bhojas
  Clan of the Yadavas
Bhumidevi
  Earth goddess
Bhurishravas
  Son of Somadatta, who fought for the Kauravas
Brahannala
  Arjuna’s name in the court of Virata in his disguise as a
eunuch
Brahma
  God as creator;  part of the trinity, Brahma-Vishnu-
Shiva
Brahma loka
  The celestial abode of Brahma
Brahman
  The supreme consciousness
Brihadratha
  J arasandha’s father
Brihaspathi
  Preceptor of the gods
Chandakaushika   Sage
Chanura
  Wrestler in the court of Kams
Charu
  One of Krishna’s sons
Chekitana
  Yadava warrior who fought for the Pandavas
Chitralekha
  Artist friend of Usha, possessing supernormal powers
Chitrangada
  Son of Santanu
Dakshinamurti
  Name of Shiva as the Supreme Guru
Damaghosha
  King of Chedi, father of Shishupala
Damagranthi
  Name of Nakula during the thirteenth year of exile
Damodara
  A name of Krishna
Dantavakra
  King who was killed by Krishna
Daruka
  Krishna’s charioteer
Dattatreya
  Great sage
Devakan
  Krishna’s maternal grandfather
Devaki
  Krishna’s mother
Dhaumya
  Spiritual guide of the Pandavas
Dhenuka
  Demon in the form of a donkey
Dhritarashtra
  Father of the Kauravas
Draupadi
  Wife of the Pandavas, daughter of Drupada
Drishtadyumna
  Son of Drupada, brother of Draupadi
Drona
  Preceptor of the Kauravas and Pandavas
Dronacharya
  Honoriﬁc title for the preceptor Drona
Drupada
  King of Panchala, father of Draupadi, Shikandin, and
Drishtadyumna
Durvasa
  Sage noted for his short temper
Duryodhana
  Eldest of the hundred Kaurava brothers
Dussasana
  Second of the Kaurava brothers
Gandhari
  Wife of Dhritarashtra, mother of the Kauravas
Ganga
  Personiﬁcation of the river Ganga;  mother of Bhishma
Ganesha
  Elephant-headed son of Shiva
Garga
  Preceptor of the Yadavas
Garuda
  An eagle, the vehicle of Lord Vishnu
Gatotkacha
  Bhima’s son by his rakshasi wife, Hidimbi
Gopalakrishna
  Literally, “cowherd Krishna”;  a name of Krishna
Govinda
  A name of Krishna
Hari
  A name of Vishnu/ Krishna
Hidimba
  A rakshasa, Hidimbi’s brother
Hiranyaksha
  Demon killed by Lord Vishnu in his incarnation as a
boar
Hiranyakashipu   Hiranyaksha’s brother, killed by Lord Vishnu in his
incarnation as the man-lion
Indra
  King of the gods;  god of thunder, lightning, and rain
Iravan
  Son of Arjuna by the Naga princess Ulupi
J ambavan
  Devotee of Lord Rama, father of Krishna' s wife
J ambavati
J ambavati
  A wife of Krishna
J anardana
  A name of Vishnu/ Krishna
J ara (1)
  Hunter boy who shot the fatal arrow at Krishna
J ara (2)
  Rakshasi who put together the two halves of King
J arasandha
J arasandha
  King of Magadha, who was killed by Bhima
J aya
  Sentry at Vaikuntha, Lord Vishnu’s abode
J ayadratha
  Duryodhana’s brother-in-law
Kala
  The Time spirit which is an aspect of the Supreme and
therefore of Krishna
Kalanemi
  Kamsa’s name in his previous birth as a demon
Kalayavana
  A foreign king who was killed by King Muchukunda
Kalindi
  Name of a river, as well as one of Krishna’s wives
Kaliya
  Snake vanquished by Krishna
Kamsa
  Tyrant king of Mathura;  Krishna’s uncle
Kanchanamala
  Karna’s wife
Kanka
  Name taken by Yudhishtira in the thirteenth year of
exile
Karna
  Kunti’s illegitimate son by the sun god
Karthyayani
  Name of a goddess
Kaunteya
  A son of Kunti, applicable to any of the Pandavas
Kauravas
  Collective name for the hundred sons of Dhritarashtra
Keshava
  A name of Krishna
Keshi
  Demon in the form of a horse
Kichaka
  Brother-in-law of King Virata
Kripa
  Drona’s brother-in-law;  tutor at the court of
Hastinapura
Krishna
  The eighth and supreme incarnation of Lord Vishnu
Kritavarma
  General of the Yadava forces, who fought on the side
of the Kauravas
Kubera
  King of the Yakshas and the god of wealth
Kuchela
  Poverty-stricken friend of Krishna
Kukshama
  Kuchela’s wife
Kumbhakarna
  Brother of the demon Ravana
Kunti
  Mother of the Pandavas
Kuntibhoja
  Foster father of Kunti
Kuru
  Founder of the Kuru dynasty
Lakshman
  Duryodhana' s son
Lakshmana (1)
  One of Krishna’s wives
Lakshmana (2)
  Duryodhana’s daughter, who married Krishna’s son
Samba
Lakshmi;
Lakshmi Devi
  Consort of Lord Vishnu, goddess of wealth
Madhava
  A name of Vishnu/ Krishna
Madri
  A wife of Pandu, mother of Nakula and Sahadeva
Mahabali
  Demon king killed by Lord Vishnu in his incarnation as
Vamana, the dwarf
Mahadeva
  A name of Shiva (the great god)
Manamohana
  Literally, “one who bewilders the mind”;  a name of
Krishna
Manigriva
  Son of Kubera, the Lord of Wealth
Manmatha
  God of Love
Maya Devi (1)
  Cook of Sambasura, incarnation of Rathi, the wife of
Manmatha
Maya Devi (2)
  Goddess who incarnated as Yashoda’s daughter and
was exchanged for Krishna
Mayan
  Divine architect
Meghapushpa
  One of Krishna’s horses
Mirabai
  Great medieval woman devotee of Lord Krishna
Mitrabinda
  One of Krishna’s wives
Muchukunda
  Ancient king
Muka
  Demon who took on the form of a boar
Murasura
  Demon who lived in the moat in Narakasura’s capital
Mushtika
  Wrestler in the court of Kamsa
Nagnajit
  King of Kosala, father of Krishna’s wife Satya
Nakula
  Fourth of the Pandava brothers
Nalakubera
  Son of Kubera
Nanda
  Krishna’s foster father, chieftain of Gokula
Narada
  Celestial sage
Narakasura
  Demon king who was killed by Krishna
Narasimha
  Fourth incarnation of Lord Vishnu, as the man-lion
Narayana
  The supreme godhead dwelling in his abode at
Vaikuntha;  a sage of that name
Nriga
  King who took on the form of a garden lizard due to a
curse
Panchajana
  Demon from whom Krishna procured his conch
Panchali
  Princess of Panchala;  another name for Draupadi
Pandavas
  Collective name for the ﬁve sons of Pandu
Pandu
  Father of the Pandavas, son of Ambalika
Parashara
  Great sage, father of Vyasa
Parashurama
  Sixth incarnation of Lord Vishnu
Parikshit
  Son of Abhimanyu and Uttara, sole heir of the
Pandavas
Parjanya
  A name of Indra
Parvati
  Consort of Lord Shiva
Paundraka
  Foolish king who claimed to be the eighth incarnation
Pradyumna
  Krishna’s son by Rukmini
Prapti
  A wife of Kamsa
Prasena
  Brother of Satrajit, a Yadava chief
Pritha
  Kunti’s former name
Punardatta
  Son of Guru Sandeepani
Pundarikaksha
  “Lotus-eyed one”;  a name of Krishna
Purochana
  Man who had been ordered by Duryodhana to burn the
Pandavas alive at Varanavata
Pururavas
  Ancestor of the Pandavas
Putana
  Demoness sent by Kamsa to kill infants
Radha (1)
  Krishna’s favorite playmate in Vrindavana, said to be
an incarnation of Prakriti
Radha (2)
  Karna’s foster mother
Raivata
  Father of Revathi, the wife of Balarama
Rama (1)
  Seventh incarnation of Lord Vishnu, whose story is
told in the Ramayana
Rama (2)
  Short form for Balarama
Ravana
  Demon king of Lanka, who was killed by Sri Rama
Revati
  Wife of Balarama
Rohini
  Wife of Vasudeva, mother of Balarama
Rudra
  A name of Lord Shiva
Rukmi
  Brother of Rukmini
Rukmini
  Princess of Vidarbha;  ﬁrst wife of Lord Krishna
Sahadeva
  Youngest of the Pandava brothers
Shaibya
  Name of one of Krishna’s horses
Sairandhri
  Draupadi’s name in the thirteenth year of exile
Salva
  King who owned the aerial car Saubha
Shalya
  Uncle of Nakula and Sahadeva
Samba
  Krishna’s son by J ambavati
Sanat Kumaras
  Four sons of Brahma, boy sages
Sanatkumara
  Sage, spiritual son of Brahma (God as creator)
Sandipani
  Krishna’s preceptor at Avanti
Sanjaya
  Dhritarashtra’s personal attendant
Shantanu
  Bhishma’s father
Satyabhama
  One of Krishna’s wives
Satyavathi
  Wife of King Shantanu
Satrajit
  Father of Satyabhama
Satyaki
  Yadava chieftain;  Krishna’s close friend
Shakata
  Demon in the form of a cart
Shakuni
  Duryodhana’s uncle and evil counselor
Shankhachuda
  Servant of Kubera
Shatadhanva
  Former suitor of Satyabhama
Shesha
  Adishesha, the celestial serpent
Shikhandin
  Son of Drupada, ﬁrst born as a girl
Shikhandini
  Daughter of Drupada who later changed her sex
Shishupala
  Prince of Chedi, Krishna’s cousin
Shiva
  God as destroyer or transformer;  part of the trinity,
Brahma-Vishnu-Shiva
Sita
  Wife of Lord Rama
Skanda
  General of the gods;  son of Lord Shiva
Shridama
  Gopala, devotee of Krishna
Shrutayudha
  Son of Varuna, fought for the Kauravas
Subhadra
  Krishna’s younger sister;  wife of Arjuna
Sudama (1)
  Garland maker at Mathura
Sudama (2)
  Krishna’s friend at Guru Sandipani’s ashrama
Sugriva
  Name of one of Krishna’s horses
Sura
  Ancestor of the Yadavas
Surabhi
  Celestial, wish-yielding cow
Surya
  Sun god
Surya Narayana   Lord Narayana in the form of the sun
Suyodhana
  Another name for Duryodhana
Shveta
  Son of Virata
Tantripala
  Name of Sahadeva in the thirteenth year of exile
Trinavarta
  Demon in the form of a cyclone
Trivakra
  Name of the hunchback in Mathura whom Krishna
straightened
Uddhava
  Krishna’s cousin and close friend as well as prime
minister
Ugrasena
  Father of Kamsa, king of the Yadavas
Uluka (1)
  Son of Shakuni
Uluka (2)
  Brahmin who was sent as ambassador to the Kuru court
Upananda
  Old herdsman at Gokula
Urvashi
  Celestial nymph
Usha
  Wife of Krishna’s grandson Aniruddha
Uttanga
  Old Brahmin devotee of Krishna
Uttara
  Virata’s daughter, wife of Abhimanyu
Uttara Kumara
  Virata’s son
Vaasudeva
  “Son of Vasudeva”;  a name of Krishna
Vasudeva
  Krishna’s father
Valahaka
  Name of one of Krishna’s horses
Valahala
  Bhima’s name during the thirteenth year of exile
Vamana
  Fifth incarnation of Lord Vishnu, in the form of a
dwarf
Vanamali
  Literally, “wearer of the wildﬂower garland”;  a name
of Vishnu/ Krishna
Varuna
  Lord of the waters
Vasishta
  Great sage, great-grandfather of Vyasa
Vayu
  Lord of the winds
Vichitravirya
  Father of Dhritarashtra
Vidura
  Dhritarashtra’s half brother, renowned for his wisdom
Vijaya
  Sentry at Vaikuntha, Lord Vishnu’s abode
Vinda
  Prince of Avanti, Mitrabinda’s brother
Virata
  King of Matsya, at whose court the Pandavas spent
their thirteenth year of exile
Vishnu
  God as sustainer or preserver;  part of the trinity,
Brahma-Vishnu-Shiva
Vishnuratha
  Name of Parikshit, son of Abhimanyu
Vishwakarma
  Architect of gods
Vraja
  Area where Krishna spent his childhood, including
Gokula and Vrindavana
Vyasa
  Sage who composed the Mahabharata as well as many
other epics
Vyoma
  Demon
Yadava
  Name of Krishna or anyone belonging to the Yadava
clan
Yadu
  Ancestor of the Yadavas from whom the clan got its
name
Yashoda
  Foster mother of Krishna
Yogamaya
  Goddess of illusion
Yudhishtira
  Eldest of the Pandava brothers
Yuyutsu
  Illegitimate son of Dhritarashtra who fought on the side
of the Pandavas
Glossary of  Sanskrit T erms
abhisheka: Coronation or consecration ceremony in which water or milk is
poured over the head;  ceremonial bath
adharma: Unrighteousness
advaita: The teaching that all of the creation is the projection of the one;  that
only God exists
Agnihotra: Fire sacriﬁce
ahamkara: Ego
akola: A type of tree (medicinal plant)
akrura: Not cruel
akshara: Nonperishable, immobile, immutable
akshahridaya: A game of dice
akshauhini: Battalion in an army
akshaya patra: The bowl of plenty
amavasya: New moon night
amrita: Nectar of the gods, which confers immortality
ananda: Bliss
Ancharika: The missile that Arjuna used to kill Karna
Argya Puja: Worship of the foremost or noblest person
arupa: Without form
artha: Wealth, worldly prosperity, self-interest
artharathi: A chariot warrior who needs the help of many foot soldiers
Aryan: Pertaining to the Aryans
ashrama: A retreat for spiritual aspirants
Ashvamedha Yajna: The Vedic horse sacriﬁce, usually conducted by a king
in order to proclaim himself emperor
astra: Weapon;  missile
asura: A hostile and demonic being
asvattha: Sacred tree
atman: Individual soul, not of the ego or lower self aspect but the divine
spark within
atma-vidya: The science of the self
atmic: Pertaining to the soul or self
aum: The mystic sound denoting the Supreme
avabrithasnana: The ceremonial bath taken after the conclusion of a holy
rite
avadhuta: An enlightened ascetic, normally wanders about without clothes.
usually noted for eccentric habits expressive of total freedom
avatara: Descent or incarnation of God
Ayudha Puja: Worship of weapons
bethua: A type of spinach
Bhagavad Gita: Literally, “song of God”;  Hindu scripture of seven hundred
verses, part of the ancient Sanskrit epic the Mahabharata
Bhagavata Dharma: Spiritual gospel taught by Krishna
bhakta: Devotee
bhakti: Love for God, devotion
bhakti yoga: The yoga of devotion
Bharatavarsha: Ancient name for India
bhava: A mood or attitude;  a mode or manner of relating to God
bhavana: Subjective state of feeling, often used in sense of one or another
ﬂavor of devotion to God
brahmachari: One who is a celibate in thought, word, and deed
brahmamuhurta: An auspicious time of the day, between 3 and 6 a.m.
Brahmashirshastra: A type of very powerful missile
Brahmastra: The missile of Brahma
Brahmin: A member of the priestly caste, regarded as the highest of the four
Hindu castes, traditionally assigned the occupation of priest, scholar, and
teacher
buddhi: Intellect
champaka: A type of sweet-smelling ﬂower
handala: An outcast, a person at the bottom of the social order
hid; chit: Consciousness
hitta: Superconscious mind, collective unconscious
dakshina: Gift to a holy person
dakshinayana: The six months of the year from J uly to December
deva: A god
Devadatta: Name of Arjuna’s conch
devi: A goddess
dharma: Righteousness, duty;  cosmic law
dharmakshetra : Field of virtue;  divine life
dharma yuddha: A just war
dhyana: Meditation
Digvijaya: Ceremony in which an emperor proves his suzerainty over other
kings by sending his warriors through their territories;  tour of conquest
dvadasi: Twelfth day of the lunar fortnight
Dwapara: The third of the four ages that, according to Hindu cosmology,
Earth cycles through. Krishna is said to have lived in this epoch, which
ended at his death, at which time the fourth age, the Kali Yuga, began, in
which we are said to be living today.
ekadasi: The eleventh day of the lunar fortnight, a day of partial or total
fasting for many Hindus
gandharva: Celestial singer, said to have a very beautiful voice
Gayatri: Hymn or mantra, repeated daily by many Hindus, to the sun as the
emblem of God
ghee: Clariﬁed butter
Gita: Song;  shortened name for Bhagavad Gita
Gokula: Name of the cowherd settlement where Krishna grew up
gopa: Herdsman
gopala: Cowherd boy
gopi; gopika: Milkmaid;  usually refers to the milkmaids of Vraja, who are
said to have been the purest devotees of Krishna
gunas: Three qualities or modes of nature;  the building blocks of creation and
all of its objects: sattva (harmony, peace, stillness), rajas (dynamism,
stimulating activity, motion, desire), and tamas (dullness, lethargy, inertia,
stupidity)
guru: Spiritual guide and preceptor
guru-dakshina: Fee given to the guru at the end of the course of study
gurukula: Hermitage of the guru
Ishvara: God
japa: Repetition of the Lord’s name
apa yoga: Repetition of the Lord’s name, as a yoga or spiritual discipline
iva; jivatma: The individual embodied soul
nana: Spiritual insight or knowledge;  wisdom
nana-bhakta: A devotee of God who has realized spiritual knowledge
nanamudra: Symbol of knowledge made by joining the thumb and
foreﬁnger
nani: A sage who has realized the highest wisdom
kadamba: A type of tree
Kali: The ferocious aspect of the Divine Mother, the female aspect of God
Kali Yuga: The Dark Age, in which we are living at present;  the fourth of the
cosmic ages of Hindu lore, the ﬁrst being the Golden Age
Kalpaka vriksha: Heavenly wish-yielding tree
kama: Desire or passion
karana sharira: Subtle body
karma: The law of moral cause and effect as it applies to an individual’s
thoughts, words, and deeds
karma phaladata: He who gives the fruits of action
karma yoga: The yoga of acting without desire for fruits, offering all results
to God
karnikara: Small red berry
Kaumodaki: Name of Krishna’s mace
Kaustubha: Ruby on Vishnu/ Krishna’s chest
kavacha: Armor
Krishnamaya: Filled with Krishna’s love
Krishnavatara: Incarnation as Krishna
kshara: Perishable, changeable, impermanent
Kshatriya: Second highest caste;  the ruling and warrior class
Kshatriya Dharma: Rules to be followed by members of the Kshatriya caste
kshetra: Field;  the manifest universe
kshetrajna: Knower of the ﬁeld, consciousness
kundala: Earrings
lakh: One hundred thousand
ila: Play or game of God;  creation as the play or actions of God
ilavatar: Sportive incarnation
ingam: Stone symbol of Lord Shiva
inga sharira: Subtle body
madhurya bhava: Literally, “sweet mood”;  a mode relating to God in
which God is felt to be one’s lover, as with the gopis
maharatha: First category of chariot warriors
mahayogi: Great yogi
malathi: J asmine creeper
mallika: J asmine ﬂower
manas: Mind
mantra: A name of God or sacred verbal formula that is repeated with
reverence for its spiritually uplifting and purifying effect
mantric: Pertaining to mantra
maya: The divine power of illusion that projects the world of multiplicity and
conceals the transcendent unity
Maya Sabha: Hall of illusion built in the city of Indraprastha
moksha: Spiritual liberation
mithya: Unreal, false
mukti: Spiritual liberation
muni: A silent sage;  often a recluse
Nagastra: The cobra missile
Nandaka: Name of Krishna’s sword
Narayanastra: The missile of Lord Narayana
nishkama: Without worldly desire
nitya: Eternal
nitya brahmachari: One who is celibate from birth
niyamas: Observances that cultivate positive qualities, contentment;  practice
of spiritual disciplines, study and self-enquiry, and surrender to God
padmavyuha: Lotus formation in an army
paduka: Footwear
Panchajanya: Name of Krishna’s conch
pandit: Learned person
Paramatma: Supreme spirit or soul;  the cosmic or universal soul
pitambara: Yellow garment, of the kind Krishna is said to have worn
Prakriti: Nature
pralaya: Deluge, dissolution;  refers to the destruction of the world at the end
of the creation cycle
prapti: Self-surrender
prasada: Remainder of food offered to God or a saint, eaten by devotees as
consecrated food
puja: Ritualistic worship
punya: Spiritual merit
Puranas: Post-Vedic classical literary texts written in Sanskrit
purnavatara: The supreme or complete incarnation
Purusha: Male aspect of God, formless, unmanifested aspect, actionless
ground of all being, as opposed to Prakriti or nature, the creation, or the
manifest universe
Purushottama: Supreme person;  also called Uttama Purusha
purushottama yoga: The yoga of the supreme person
rajas: The guna that instigates action, passion, motion, or desire;
ajasic: Pertaining to rajas;  passionate, full of action, dynamic
Rajasuya; Rajasuya Yajna: A Vedic ceremony conducted by kings
akshasa: Member of a cannibalistic tribe existing in ancient India;  a demon
akshasi: Female rakshasa
Rama Rajya: The reign of Sri Rama, ﬁlled with prosperity and happiness;
the story is told in the Ramayana
asalila: The blissful dance of love, by which Krishna entertained the gopis
Rig Veda: Ancient collection of Hindu sacred verses, consisting principally
of hymns to various deities
ishi: Seer, sage
udraksha: A type of berry used in a rosary, considered sacred to Shiva
sabha: Hall, assembly
adhana: Spiritual self-training and exercise
adhu: Holy man, mendicant
Sahasranama: Literally, “thousand names”;  a hymn containing a thousand
names of God
akhya bhava: A feeling of friendship;  the mood in which the devotee relates
to God as a friend
amadhi: Superconscious state achieved in meditation
amarathi: Lesser type of chariot warrior
amsara: Life and worldly existence;  the manifest universe in which
reincarnation takes place
amsara chakra: The wheel of births and deaths
Sanatana Dharma: The eternal law or religion;  correct name for Hinduism
andal: Sandalwood tree;  oil or paste from that tree
Sandhya Vandana: Worship of the sun in the morning and evening with the
famous Gayatri hymn
ankhya yoga: Yoga of wisdom;  yoga of discrimination between self and
nonself
annyasa: The life of renunciation
annyasi: One who has renounced worldly life, a monk
Sarnga: Name of Krishna’s bow
arati: Charioteer
ari: Five-meter piece of cloth worn by Indian women
at: Existence, being, goodness, truth
at-chit-ananda: Existence-knowledge-bliss, said to be a description of the
essential nature of the Supreme
attva: The guna of harmony, intelligence, and clarity
attvic: Pertaining to sattva;  pure, spiritual light
ena: Army
hakti: Power, force, energy;  the divine or cosmic energy, usually thought of
as feminine
Shakti: Weapon Indra bestowed on Karna
Shaturagdini: Name of Bhima’s mace
Shrivatsa: An imprint on the chest of Vishnu/ Krishna
iddhi: Supernormal power, attained through spiritual disciplines and
austerities
oma: Medicinal plant used in Vedic ceremonies
thithaprajna: One ﬁrmly established in wisdom;  enlightened person
Sudarshana: Name of Krishna’s discus
Sudharma: Celestial assembly hall
udra: Servant
uta: Charioteer
utaputra: Son of a charioteer
vadharma: One’s own law of action or sacred duty, particular to each
individual
vayamprakasha: Self-effulgent
wayamvara: Marriage by the personal choice of the bride
tamas: The guna that hides or darkens, giving rise to inertia, sloth, and
ignorance
amasic: Pertaining to tamas
apas; tapasya: Spiritual discipline or austerity, such as meditation;
concentration of spiritual force
andava: The cosmic dance of Lord Shiva
ilaka: Auspicious mark on the forehead
rigunatita: One who is beyond the control of the three gunas
ulsi: A type of basil plant, beloved by Krishna
yagi: Renunciate, one untouched by worldly desires
Upanishads: Certain portions of the Vedas dealing with the Supreme
uttama: Highest;  supreme
uttama lila: Supreme game
Uttama Purusha: Supreme person;  also called Purushottama
uttarayana: The six months of the year from J anuary to J une
Vaishnava: A devotee of God in the form of Lord Vishnu
vanamala: Garland made of ﬁve wildﬂowers of which tulsi is the main, worn
by Vishnu/ Krishna
varnashrama dharma: Duties pertaining to one’s caste and state in life
vatsalya bhava: A feeling of love toward children;  the mood in which the
devotee assumes the attitude of a loving parent toward God, who is
experienced as a divine child, such as of Yashoda and Nanda toward
Krishna
Vedanta: General term for the Upanishads
Vedantic: Pertaining to the Upanishads
Vedantin: One who practices or expounds Vedantic philosophy
Vedas: The most ancient scriptures of Hinduism, four in number
Vedic: Pertaining to the Vedas
vibhutis: Extraordinary manifestations or powers of the Lord
vibhuti yoga: Chapters in the Bhagavad Gita and the Uddhava Gita dealing
with the manifestations of the Lord
Vijayadasami: Literally, “victorious tenth”;  the tenth day of the yearly
worship of the goddess Durga
vina: A stringed lutelike instrument with a very sweet sound
vishada: Sorrow, despondency
vishada yoga: The yoga of Arjuna’s despondency
Vishvarupa: Literally, “universal form” or cosmic form;  refers to a form of
God that is the entire manifest universe, which Krishna showed to Arjuna in
the Bhagavad Gita
Vraja: The place where Krishna spent his childhood as a cowherd boy,
including Gokula and Vrindavana
vrittis: Mental modiﬁcations, thoughts
vyuha: Formation
yajna: Sacriﬁcial ceremony, usually involving ﬁre
yaksha: A kind of celestial being
yamas: Practices of moral virtues: nonviolence, truthfulness, nonstealing,
continence, and freedom from greed
yoga: Union or achieving oneness with the Supreme;  spiritual disciplines
yogashastra: The science of achieving union with God;  treatises in which
both theory and practice of yoga are combined
yogi: One who is striving to achieve union with the Supreme
yuga: Epoch
yuvaraja: Crown prince or heir apparent to a throne
About the Author
Mataji Devi Vanamali has written seven books on the gods of the Hindu
pantheon, including Hanuman, The Play of God, The Song of Rama, and
Shakti, as well as translating the Bhagavad Gita. She is the founder and
president of Vanamali Gita Yogashram, dedicated to sharing the wisdom of
Sanatana Dharma and charitable service to children. She lives at the
Vanamali ashram at Rishikesh in northern India.
About Inner T raditions • Bear &
 C ompany
Founded in 1975, Inner Traditions is a leading publisher of books on
indigenous cultures, perennial philosophy, visionary art, spiritual traditions
of the East and West, sexuality, holistic health and healing, self-
development, as well as recordings of ethnic music and accompaniments for
meditation.
In J uly 2000, Bear &  Company joined with Inner Traditions and moved
from Santa Fe, New Mexico, where it was founded in 1980, to Rochester,
Vermont. Together Inner Traditions •  Bear &  Company have eleven
imprints: Inner Traditions, Bear &  Company, Healing Arts Press, Destiny
Books, Park Street Press, Bindu Books, Bear Cub Books, Destiny
Recordings, Destiny Audio Editions, Inner Traditions en Españ ol, and Inner
Traditions India.
For more information or to browse through our more than one thousand
titles in print, visit www.InnerTraditions.com.
 
Become a member of the Inner Traditions community and receive our
newsletter of new releases that you will be of interest to you, as well as
special offers only for members.
CLICK HERE
Books of  Related Interest
H anuman
The Devotion and Power of the Monkey God
by Vanamali
Shakti
Realm of the Divine Mother
by Vanamali
Shiva
The Wild God of Power and Ecstasy
by Wolf-Dieter Storl, Ph.D.
Kali
The Feminine Force
by Ajit Mookerjee
Indian Mythology
Tales, Symbols, and Rituals from the Heart of the Subcontinent
by Devdutt Pattanaik
C hakras
Energy Centers of Transformation
by Harish Johari
T he Myths and Gods of  India
The Classic Work on Hindu Polytheism from the Princeton Bollingen Series
by Alain Danié lou
T he Magical Adventures of  Krishna
How a Mischief Maker Saved the World
by Vatsala Sperling
I llustrated by Pieter Weltevrede
INNER TRADITIONS •  BEAR &  COMPANY
P.O. Box 388
Rochester, VT 05767
1-800-246-8648
www.InnerTraditions.com
Or contact your local bookseller
Inner Traditions
One Park Street
Rochester, Vermont 05767
www.InnerTraditions.com
Copyright ©  2000, 2012 by Vanamali Gita Yogashram
Originally published in India in 2000 by Aryan Books International under
the title Sri Krishna Lila.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval
system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
L ibrary of  C ongress C ataloging-in-Publication Data
Vanamali.
The complete life of Krishna : based on the earliest oral traditions and the
sacred scriptures /  Vanamali.
p. cm.
“Originally published in 2000 by Aryan Books International under the
title Sri Krishna Lila.”
Summary: “The ﬁrst book to cover Krishna’a entire life, from his
childhood pranks to his ﬁnal powerful acts in the Mahabharata war”—
Provided by publisher.
   print ISBN: 978-1-59477-475-1
   ebook ISBN: 978-1-59477-690-8
Illustrations by unknown Pattachitra artist from Orissa.
To send correspondence to the author of this book, mail a ﬁrst-class letter to
the author c/ o Inner Traditions •  Bear &  Company, One Park Street,
Rochester, VT 05767, and we will forward the communication, or contact
the author at www. vanamaliashram. org.
 
 
 
Electronic edition produced by
 
www.antrikexpress.com
