• • •
The Supreme Personality of Godhead
A.C. Bhaktivedanta· Swami
$8.00 U.S.A.
£3 U.K.
The most comprehensi,·e and authorita
tive Vedic scriptural literature is the
Snmad-Bhiiguvatam (.. The Beautiful Story
of the Personality of Godhead"), the
mature contribution of Srila Vyasadeva, ·
the compiler of the Vedas. Of the twelve
cantos of Snmad-Bhiigavatam, the tenth
canto is considered the most confidential,
since it describes all the transcendental
pastimes of Sri  !Ia, the Supreme Per
sonality of Godhead. K CUJ is a su_mmary
study of the tenth canto of Snmad-
Bhiigavatam. ·
The activities of K !la, which appear to
be like those of an ordinary human being,
can only be properly understood with the
help of a bona fide spiritual master fully
realized in the knowledge of this transcen
dental nature. A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Prabhupada is authorized by an unbreak
able disciplic succession of spiritual mas
ters going back thousands of years to the
time when  !Ia appeared. Because he is
the representati,·e of the disciplic suc
cession for this age and because of his
complete immersion in low of KH!Ia
Prabhupada is uniquely qualified to pre
sent Kg!la as He is.
 ukade,·a Gos\·ami, the original speaker
of Srimad-Bhiigavatam, has declared that
there are three cla ;;es of men and that the
pastimes of  !Ia "ill be relished by each
of them. The liberated soul who is no
longer interested in mundane topics most
certainly hears about  !Ia with the high·
est pleasure. The person who is trying to
become liberated "ill also enjo · these
topics of the Personality of Godhead,
which purify an ·one who hear.; them.
And even the gro& materialist will enjoy
hearing about  !Ia because of the resem
blance between His affairs with the gopi5
and the lming affair.; of ordinary boys and
girls.
Farseeing the publication of this book,
with its fifty-eight full-color illustrations,
Prabhupada commented, " o other reli
gion has such a full concept of God. I
think our K CUJ book will convince them.
Whoe,·er reads it will become a devotee
ofK  -··
With Introductory note by George Harrison
Not for sale in India




KRSNA• • •
The Suprem{} Personality of Godhead
OTHER BOOKS by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
The Bhagavad-gitii As It Is
Srimad-Bhiigavatam (12 volumes)
Teachings of Lord Caitanya
The Nectar of Devotion
Sri Isopan4ad
Easy Journey to Other Planets
K[§!l.a Consciousness: The Topmost Yoga System
The First Step in God Realization
Back to Godhead Magazine (Editor)
• • •
The Supreme Personality of Godhead
A Summary Study of SrTia Vyasadeva's Srimad-Bhiigavatam, Tenth Canto.
VOLUME ONE
His Divine Grace
A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada
Founder-Acarya of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness
ISKCON PRESS
38 North Beacon Street
Boston, Massachusetts 02134
Copyright© 1970 A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami
Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number: 74-118081
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Printed by Dai Nippon Printing Co., Ltd. in Japan
To My Father, Gour Mohon De (1849-1930)
a pure devotee of Kr  a, who raised me as a
Kr  a conscious child from the beginning of
my life. In my boyhood ages he instructed me
how to play the mrdanga. He gave me Radha
Kr  a Vigraha to worship, and he gave me
Jagannatha-Ratha to duly observe the festival
as my childhood play. He was kind to me, and
I imbibed from him the ideas later on solidified
by my spiritual master, the eternal father.
Contents
Introductory Note by George Harrison vm
Preface x1
Introduction xvu
1 I Advent of Lord Kr !la 1
2 I Prayers by the Demigods for Lord KH!la in the Womb 9
3 I Birth of Lord KH!la 23
4 I Karhsa Begins His Persecutions 3 2
5 I Meeting o f Nanda and Vasudeva 37
6 I Putana Killed 43
7 I Salvation of Tr!lavarta 50
8 I Vision of the Universal Form 56
9 I Mother Yasoda Binding Lord Kf !la 64
10 I Deliverance of Nalakuvara and Mal)igr'iva 67
11 I Killing the Demons Vatsasura and Bakasura 7 3
12 I The Killing of the Aghasura Demon 80
13 I The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by Brahma 86
14 I Prayers Offered by Lord Brahma to Lord KH!la 96
15 I Killing of Dhenukasura 113
16 I Subduing Kaliya 119
17 I Extinguishing the Forest Fire 128
18 I Killing the Demon Pralambasura 131
19 I Devouring the Forest Fire 134
20 I Description of Autumn 136
21 I The Gopls Attracted by the Flute 147
22 I Stealing the Garments of the Unmarried Gopi Girls 152
23 I Delivering the Wives of the Brahma!las who Performed Sacrifices- 157
24 I Worshiping Govardhana Hill 166
25 I Devastating Rainfall in Vrndavana 17 3
26 I Wonderful Kr !la 177
27 I Prayers by Indra, the King of Heaven 180
28 I Releasing Nanda Maharaja from The Clutches of Varu!J.a 184
29 I The Rasa Dance: Introduction 188
30 I KH!J.a's Hiding from the Gopis 203
31 I Songs by the Gopis 208
32 I Description of the Rasa Dance 214
33 I Vidyadhara Liberated and the Demon Sankhasura Killed 225
34 I The Gopis' Feelings of Separation 231
35 I Kamsa Sends Akrura for Kr !la 236
36 I Killing the Ke5i Demon and Vyomasura 240
37 I Akrura's Arrival in Vrndavana 244
38 I Akrura's Return Journey and His Visiting of Vi !J.uloka
Within the Yamuna River 251
39 I Prayers by Akrura 257
40 I Kr !la Enters Mathura 261
41 I The Breaking of the Bow in the Sacrificial Arena 266
42 I The Killing of the Elephant Kuvalayapi a 271
4 3 I The Killing of Kamsa 275
44 I KH!J.a Recovers the Son of His Teacher 281
45 I Uddhava Visits Vrndavana 290
46 I Delivery of the Message of Kr !la to the Gopis 297
4 7 I KH!J.a Pleases His Devotees 314
48 I Ill-motivated Dhrtara  ra 321
49 I KH!J.a Erects the Dvaraka Fort 327
50 I Deliverance of Mucukunda 337
51 I KH!J.a, the Ranchor 347
52 I KH!J.a Kidnaps Rukmi!J.i 355
53 I Krsna Defeats All the Princes and Takes Rukmini Home to Dvaraka 362. . . .
54 I Pradyumna Born to Kf !la and Rukmi!J.i 371
Glossary 377
Index 379
Note on Pronunciation of Transliterated Sanskrit Words 38 3
From App[e
Everybody is looking for K:J;t  A.
Some don't realize that they are, but they are.
K:J;t  A is GOD, the Source of all that exists, the Cause of all that is,
was, or ever will be.
As GOD is unlimited, HE has many Names.
Allah-Buddha-Jehova-Rama: All are K:J;t  A, all are ONE.
God is not abstract; He has both the impersonal and the personal
aspects to His personality which is SUPREME, ETERNAL, BLISSFUL,
and full of KNOWLEDGE. As a single drop of water has the same qualities
as an ocean of water, so has our consciousness the qualities of GOD'S
consciousness . . . but through our identification and attachment with
material energy (physical body, sense pleasures, material possessions, ego,
etc.) our true TRANSCENDENTAL CONSCIOUSNESS has been polluted,
and like a dirty mirror it is unable to reflect a pure image.
With many lives our association with the TEMPORARY has grown.
This impermanent body, a bag of bones and flesh, is mistaken for our true
self, and we have accepted this temporary condition to be final.
Through all ages, great SAINTS have remained as living proof that
this non-temporary, permanent state of GOD CONSCIOUSNESS can be
revived in all living Souls. Each soul is potentially divine.
Kr !la says in Bhagavad Gita: "Steady in the Self, being freed from all
material contamination, the yogi achieves the highest perfectional stage of
happiness in touch with the Supreme Consciousness." (VI, 28)
YOGA (a scientific method for GOD (SELF) realization) is the pro
cess by which we purify our consciousness, stop further pollution, and
arrive at the state of Perfection, full KNOWLEDGE, full BLISS.
If there's a God, I want to see Him. It's pointless to believe in some
thing without proof, and Kr  a Consciousness and meditation are methods
where you can actually obtain GOD perception. You can actually see God,
and hear Him, play with Him. It might sound crazy, but He is actually
there, actually with you.
There are many yogic Paths-Raja, Jnana, Hatha, Kriya, Karma, Bhakti
-which are all acclaimed by the MASTERS of each method.
SWAMI BHAKTIVEDANTA is as his title says, a BHAKTI Yogi
following the path of DEVOTION. By serving GOD through each thought,
word, and DEED, and by chanting of HIS Holy Names, the devotee quickly
develops God-consciousness. By chanting
Hare Kr  a, Hare Kr  a
Krwa Kr  a, Hare Hare
Hare Rama, Hare Rama
Rama Rama, Hare Hare
one inevitably arrives at K   A Consciousness. (The proof of the pudding
is in the eating! )
I request that you take advantage of this book KF.$JYA, and enter
into its understanding. I also request that you make an appointment to
meet your God now, through the self liberating process of YOGA (UNION)
and GIVE PEACE A CHANCE.
ALL L(ou. /J££b 1 s L cUE {K".<>ISHAIA) 1-!RKt Eot-
Cje-(Jt    3tj3j?o
Aprle Corps Ltd 3 Savile Row London WI Gerrard 1.771./3993 Telex Apcore London

Preface
nivrtta-tar air upagiyamiiniid
bhavau adhiic chrotramano 'bhiriimiit
ka uttama-sloka-gUJ;tiinuviidiit
pumiin virajyeta vinii pasughniit
(Srimad-Bhiigavatam 1 0.1.4)
In these Western countries, when someone sees the cover of a book like
K[§!W, he immediately asks, "Who is Kr l)a? Who is the girl with Krwa?"
etc.
The immediate answer is that Kf l)a is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. How is that? Because He conforms in exact detail to descriptions
of the Supreme Being, the Godhead. In other words, Kf l)a is the Godhead
because He is all-attractive. Outside the principle of all-attraction, there is
no meaning to the word Godhead. How is it one can be all-attractive? First
of all, if one is very wealthy, if he has great riches, he becomes attractive
to the people in general. Similarly, if someone is very powerful, he also
becomes attractive, and if someone is very famous, he also becomes
attractive, and if someone is very beautiful or wise or unattached to
all kinds of possessions, he also becomes attractive . So from practical
experience we can observe that one is attractive due to 1) wealth,
2) power, 3) fame , 4) beauty, 5) wisdom, and 6) renunciation. One who
is in possession of all six of these opulences at the same time, who
possesses them to an unlimited degree, is understood to be the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. These opulences of the Godhead are delineated
by Parasara Muni, a great Vedic authority.
We have seen many rich persons, many powerful persons, many famous
persons, many beautiful persons, many learned and scholarly persons, and
persons in the renounced order of life unattached to material possessions.
XI
XII Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
But we have never seen any one person who is unlimitedly and simul
taneously wealthy, powerful, famous, beautiful, wise and unattached, like
Kr  a, in the history of humanity. Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, is an historical person who appeared on this earth 5,000 years
ago. He stayed on this earth for 125 years and played exactly like a human
being, but His activities were unparalleled. From the very moment of His
appearance to the moment of His disappearance, every one of His activities
is unparalleled in the history of the world, and therefore anyone who
knows what we mean by Godhead will accept Kf l)a as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. No one is equal to the Godhead, and no one is
greater than Him. That is the import of the familiar saying, "God is great."
There are various classes of men in the world who speak of God in
different ways, but according to Vedic literatures and according to the
great iiciiryas, the authorized persons versed in the knowledge of God, in
all ages, like iiciiryas Sankara, Ramanuja, Madhva, Vi l)usvami, Lord
Caitanya and all their followers by disciplic succession, all unanimously
agree that Kr  a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As far as we, the
followers of Vedic civilization, are concerned, we accept the V edic history
of the whole universe, which consists of different planetary systems
called Svargalokas, or the higher planetary system, Martyalokas, or the
intermediary planetary system, and Patalalokas, or the lower planetary
system. The modern historians of this earth cannot supply historical
evidences of events that occurred before 5,000 years ago, and the anthro
pologists say that 40,000 years ago Homo sapiens had not appeared on
this planet because evolution had not reached that point. But the Vedic
histories, the Puriir-as and Mahiibhiirata, relate human histories which ex
tend millions and billions of years into the past.
For example, from these literatures we are given the histories of Kr l)a's
appearances and disappearances millions and billions of years ago. In the
Fourth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gitii Kf l)a tells Arjuna that both He and
Arjuna had had many births before and that He (Kr  a) could remember
all of them and that Arjuna could not. This illustrates the difference
between the knowledge of Kr  a and that of Arjuna; Arjuna might have
been a very great warrior, a well-cultured member of the Kuru dynasty,
but after all, he was an ordinary human being, whereas Kf l)a, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, is the possessor of unlimited knowledge. Because
He possesses unlimited knowledge, Kr  a has a memory that is boundless.
Kf l)a's knowledge is so perfect that He remembers all the incidences of
His appearances some millions and billions of years in the past, but
Arjuna's memory and knowledge are limited by time and space, for he is
Preface XIll
an ordinary human being. In the Fourth Chapter Krwa states that He can
remember instructing the lessons of the Bhagavad-gitii some millions of
years ago to the sun-god, Vivasvan.
Nowadays it is the fashion of the atheistic class of men to try to become
God by following some mystic process. Generally the atheists claim to be
God by dint of their imagination or their meditational prowess. Kr l)-a is
not that kind of God. He does not become God by manufacturing some
mystic process of meditation, nor does He become God by undergoing the
severe austerities of the mystic yogic exercises. Properly speaking, He
never becomes God because He is the Godhead in all circumstances.
Within the prison of His maternal uncle Kamsa, where His father and
mother were confined, Kr va appeared outside His mother's body as the
four-handed Vi vu-Narayava. Then He turned Himself into a baby and
-told His father to carry Him to the house of Nanda Maharaja and his wife
Yasoda. When Kr t;Ia was just a small baby the gigantic demoness Piitana
attempted to kill Him, but when He sucked her breast He pulled out her
life. That is the difference between the real Godhead and a God manu
factured in the mystic factory. Kr  Hl had no chance to practice the mystic
yoga process, yet He manifested Himself as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead at every step, from infancy to childhood, from childhood to
boyhood, and from boyhood to young manhood. In this book Kf§!W, all
of His actiyities as a human being are described. Although Kr va plays like
a human being, He always maintains His identity as the Supreme Per
sonality of Godhead.
Since KH.r;ta is all-attractive, one should know that all his desires should
be focused on Kr va. In the Bhagavad-gitii it is said that the individual per
son is the proprietor or master ofthe body, but KHt;Ia, who is the Supersoul
present in everyone's heart, is the supreme proprietor and supreme master
of each and every individual body. As such, if we concentrate our loving
propensities upon Kr va only, then immediately universal love, unity and
tranquility will be automatically realized. When one waters the root of a
tree, he automatically waters the branches, twigs, leaves and flowers; when
one supplies food to the stomach through the mouth, he satisfies all the
various parts of the body.
The art of focusing one's attention on the Supreme and giving one's love
to Him is called Kr va consciousness. We have inaugerated the Kr t;Ia
consciousness movement so that everyone can satisfy his propensity for
loving others simply by directing his love towards Kr  1a. The whole world
is very much anxious to satisfy the dormant propensity of love for others,
but the inventions of various methods like socialism, communism, altruism 
XIV Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
humanitarianism, nationalism, and whatever else may be manufactured for
the peace and prosperity of the world, are all useless and frustrating
because of our gross ignorance of the art of loving Kr£? a. Generally people
think that by advancing the cause of moral principles and religious rites,
they will be happy. Others may think that happiness can be achieved by
economic development, and yet others think that simply by sense gratifi
cation they will be happy. But the real fact is that people can only be
happy by loving Kr  a.
Kr  a can perfectly reciprocate one's loving propensities in different
relationships called mellows or rasas. Basically there are twelve loving
relationships. One can love Kr  a as the supreme unknown, as the supreme
master, the supreme friend, the supreme child, the supreme lover. These
are the five basic love rasas. One can also love Kr  a indirectly in seven
different relationships, which are apparently different from the five pri
mary relationships. All in all, however, if one simply reposes his dormant
loving propensity in Krwa, then his life becomes successful.· This is not a
fiction but is a fact that can be realized by ·practical application. One can
directly perceive the effects that love for Kr£? a has on his life. ·
In the Ninth Chapter of the Bhagavad-gitii this science of Kr£? a con
sciousness is called the king of all knowledge, the king of all confidential
things, and the supreme science of transc dental realization. Yet we can
directly experience the results of this science of Kr£? a consciousness
because it is very easy to practice and is very pleasurable. Whatever
percentage of Kr£? a consciousness we can perform will become an eternal
asset to our life, for it is imperishable in all circumstances. It has now been
actually proved that today's confused and frustrated younger generation
in the Western countries can directly perceive the results of chanelling the
loving propensity toward Kr£? a alone.
It is said that although one executes severe austerities, penances and
sacrifices in his life, if he fails to awaken his dormant love for Kr£? a, then
all. his penances are to be considered useless. On the other hand, if one
has awakened his dormant love for Kr£? a, then what is the use in executing
austerities and penances unnecessarily?
The Kr£? a consciousness movement is the unique gift of Lord Caitanya
to the fallen souls of this age. It is a very simple method which has actually
been carried out during the last four years in the Western countries, and
there is no doubt that this movement can satisfy the dormant loving
propensities of humanity. This book Knra is another presentation to
hefp the Kr  a consciousness movement in the Western world. This tran
scendental literature is published in two parts with profuse illustrations.
Preface XV
People love to read various kinds of fiction to spend their time and
energy. Now this tendency can be directed to Kr !la. The result will
be the imperishable satisfaction of the soul, both individually and col
lectively.
It is said in the Bhagavad-gitii that even a little effort expended on the
path of Kr !la consciousness can save one from the greatest danger. Hun
dreds of thousands of examples can be cited of people who have escaped
the greatest dangers of life due to a slight advancement in Kr !la conscious
ness. We therefore request everyone to take advantage of this great tran
scendental literature. One will find that by reading one page after another,
an immense treasure of knowledge in art, science, literature, philosophy
and religion will be revealed, and ultimately, by reading this one book,
Kr§fla, love of Godhead will fructify.
My grateful acknowledgement is due to Sriman George Harrison, now
chanting Hare Kr pa, for his liberal contribution of $19,000 to meet the
entire cost of printing this volume. May Krwa bestow upon this nice boy
further advancement in Kr pa consciousness .
And at last ll!Y ever-willing blessings are bestowed upon Sriman
Syamasundaradasa Adhikari, Sriman Brahmanandadasa Brahmacari, Sriman
Hayagrivadasa Adhikari, Sriman Satsvariipadasa Adhikari, Srimati Devahiiti
Devi, Srimatl Jadura!li Dasi, Sriman Muralidharadasa Brahmacari, Sriman
Bharadvajadasa Adhikari, and Sriman Pradyumnadasa Adhikari, etc. , for
their hard labor in different ways to make this publication a great success.
Hare Kr !la·
Advent Day of Srila
Bhak tisiddhiinta Sarasvati
February 26th, 1970
ISKCON Headquarters
3764 Watseka Avenue
Los Angeles, California
 ·-

Introduction
Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! he!. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! he!. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! Krsna! raksa miim!. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Krwa! Kr§rta! Kr§rta! Kr§rta! Kr§rta! Kr§rta! piihi miim!
Rama! Riighava! Riima! Riighava! Riima! Riighava! rak§a miim!
Krwa! Kesava! Kr§rta! Kesava! K[§IJa! Kesava! piihi miim!
Caitanya-caritiimrta (Madhya 7. 96)
While attempting to write this hook, K[§fta, let me first offer my
respectful obeisances unto my spiritual master, Om Vi§J)Upada 108 Sri
Srimad Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvati Gosvami Maharaja Prahhupada. Then
let me offer my respectful obeisances to the ocean of mercy, Lord Sri
Kf§J)a Caitanya Mahaprahhu. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kf§J)a Himself, appearing in the role of a devotee just to distribute the
highest principles of devotional service. Lord Caitanya began His
preaching from the country known as Gau9ade8a (West Bengal). And
as I belong to the Madhva-Gau9iya-sampradaya, I must therefore offer
my respectful obeisances to our disciplic succession. This Madhva-Gau9iya
sampradaya is also known as Brahma-sampradaya because the disciplic
succession originally began from Brahma. Brahma instructed the sage
Narada, Narada instructed Vyasadeva, and Vyasadeva instructed Madhva
Muni or Madhvacarya. Madhavendra Purl, the originator of Madhva
Gau9iya-sampradaya, belonged to the Madhvacarya disciplic succession ;
he had many renowned disciples both i n the sannyiisa (renounced) and
household orders of life, disciples such as Nityananda Prahhu, Advaita
Prahhu and Isvara Purl. Isvara Purl happened to he the spiritual master of
Lord Caitanya Mahaprahhu. So let us offer our respectful obeisances to
Isvara Purl, Nityananda Prabhu , Sri Advaita Acarya Prabhu , Srivasa Pal)9it
XVII
XVlll "Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and Sri Gadadhara Pa 9it. Next, let us offer .our respectful obeisances to
Svarupa-Damodara, who acted as the private secretary to Lord Caitanya
Mahaprabhu; and let us offer our respectful obeisances to Sri Vasudeva
Datta and the constant attendant of Lord Caitanya, Sri Govinda, and the
constant friend of Lord Caitanya, Mukunda, and also to Murari Gupta.
An& let us offer our respectful obeisances- to the six Gosvamis of
Vrndavana, Sri Rupa Gosvami, Sri Sanatana Gosvami, Sri Raghunatha
Bhatta Gosvami, Sri Gopala Bhatta Gosvami, Sri Jiva Gosvami and Sri
Raghunatha Dasa Gosvami.
"Kr  a Himself has explained in the Bhagavad-gitii that He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Whenever there are discrepancies in the regulative
principles of man's religious life and a prominence of irreligious activities,
He appears on this earthly planet. In other words, when Lord Sri KH a
appeared, there was a necessity of minimizing the load of sinful activities
accumulated on this planet, or in this universe. For affairs of the material
creation, Lord Maha-Vi  u, the plenary portion of Kr  a, is in charge.
When the Lord descends, the incarnation emanates from Vi  u.
Maha-Vi  u is the original cause of material creation, and from Him
Garbhodakasayi-Vi  u expands, and then K irodakasayi-Vi  u. Generally,
all the incarnations appearing within this material universe are plenary
expansions from K irodakasayi-Vi  u. Therefore, the business of mini
mizing the overload of sinful activities on this earth does not belong to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kr  a Himself. But when Kr  a appears,
all the Vi  u expansions also join with Him. Kr  a's different expansions,
namely Naraya a, the quadrupal expansion of Vasudeva, Sankar a!J.a,
Pradyumna and Aniruddha, as well as the partial plenary expansion of
Matsya or the incarnation of fish, and other _yuga-avatiiras (incarnations
for the millennium), and the manvantara-avatiiras, the incarnations of
Manus-all combine together and appear with the body of Kr  a, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. KH a is the complete whole, and all
plenary expansions and incarnations always live with Him.
When Kr  a appeared, Lord Vi  u was also with Him. Kr  a actually
appears to demonstrate His Vrndavana pastimes and to attract the for
tunate conditioned souls and invite them back home, back to Godhead.
The killing of the demons was simultaneous to His Vrndavana activities
and was carried out only by the Vi  u portion of Kr  a.
In the Bhagavad-gitii, Eighth Chapter, 20th verse, it is stated that there
is another eternal nature, the spiritual sky, which is transcendental to this
manifested and nonmanifestcd matter. The manifested world can be seen
in the form of many stars and planetary systems, such as the sun, moon,
Introduction X1X
etc., but beyond this there is a nonmanifested portion which is not
approachable to anyone in this body. And beyond that nonmanifested
matter there is the spiritual kingdom. That kingdom is described in the
Bhagavad-gitii as supreme and eternal. It is never annihilated. This material
nature is subjected to repeated creation and annihilation. But that part,
the spiritual nature, remains as it is, eternally.
The supreme abode of the Personality of Godhead, Kr pa, is also de-·
scribed in the Brahma-samhitii as the abode of cintiimari. That abode of
Lord Kr pa known as Goloka Vrndavana is full of palaces made of touch
stone. There the trees are called desire trees, and the cows are called
surabhi. The Lord is served there by hundreds and thousands of goddesses
of fortune. His name is Govinda, the Primeval Lord, and He is the cause of
all causes. There the Lord plays His flute, His eyes are like lotus petals, and
the color of His body is like that of a beautiful cloud. On His head is a
peacock feather. He is so attractive that He excels thousands of cupids.
Lord Kr pa gives only a little hint in the Gitii of His personal abode which
is the supermost planet in the spiritual kingdom. But in the Srimad
Bhiigavatam, Kf pa actually appears with all His paraphernalia and demon
strates His activities in Vrndavana, then at Mathura, and then at Dvaraka.
The subject matter of this book will gradually reveal all these activities.
The family in ·which Krwa appeared is called the Yadu dynasty. This
Yadu dynasty belongs to the family descending from Soma, the god in
the moon planet. There are two different k§atriya families of the royal
order, one descending from the king of the moon planet and the other
descending from the king of the sun planet. Whenever the Supreme Per
sonality of Godhead appears, He generally appears in a k§atriya family
because He has to establish religious principles or the life of righteousness.
The k§atriya family is the protector of the human race, according to the
Vedic system. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared as
Lord Ramacandra, He appeared in the family descending from the sun
god, known as Raghu-vamsa; and when He appeared as Lord Kr pa, He did
so in the family of Yadu-vamsa. There is a long list of the kings of the
Yadu-vamsa in the Ninth Canto, 24th chapter of Srimad-Bhiigavatam. All
of them were great powerful kings. Kr pa's father's name was Vasudeva,
son of Siirasena, descending from the Yadu dynasty. Actually, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead does not belong to any dynasty of this
material world, but the family in which the Supreme Personality of God
head appears becomes famous, by His grace. For example, sandalwood is
produced in the states of Malaya. Sandalwood has its own qualifications
apart from Malaya, but because, accidently, this wood is mainly produced
XX Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in the states of Malaya, it is known as Malayan sandalwood. Similarly,
Kr  a the Supreme Personality of Godhead belongs to everyone, but just
as the sun rises from the east, although there are other directions from
which it could rise, so , by His own choice, the Lord appears in a particular
family, and that family becomes famous.
When Kr !ia appears, all His plenary expansions also appear with Him.
Kr !la appeared along with Balarama (Baladeva) , who is known as His elder
brother. Balarama is the origin of Sarikar a!la, of the quadrupal expansion.
Balarama is also the plenary expansion of Kr !la. In this book, the attempt
will be made to show how Kr !la appeared in the family of the Y adu
dynasty and how He displayed His transcendental characteristics. This is
very vividly descri ed in  he Srima
_ d-Bhaga_vatam-  pecifically, the Tenth
Canto-and the basis of this book will be Snmad-Bhagavatam.
The pastimes of the Lord are generally heard and relished by liberated
souls. Those who are conditioned souls are interested in reading fictional
stories of the material activities of some common man. Narrations de
scribing the transcendental activities of the Lord are found in Srimad
Bhiigavatam and other Puriirws. But, the conditioned souls still prefer to
study ordinary narrations. They are not so interested in studying the
narrations of the pastimes of the Lord, Kr !la. And yet, the descriptions of
the pastimes of Lord Kr !la are so attractive that they are relishable for all
classes of men. There are three classes of men in this world. One class
consists of liberated souls, another consists of those who are trying to be
liberated, and the third consists of materialistic men. Whether one is
liberated or is trying to be liberated, or is even grossly materialistic, the
pastimes of Lord Kr !la are worth studying.
Liberated souls have no interest in materialistic activities. The imper
sonalist theory that after liberation one becomes _inactive and needs hear
nothing does not prove that a liberated person is actually inactive. A living
soul cannot be inactive. He is either active in the conditioned state or in
the liberated state. A diseased person, for example, is also active, but his
activities are all painful. The same person, when .freed from the diseased
condition, is still active, but in the healthy condition the activities are full
of pleasure. Similarly, the impersonalists manage to get freed from the ,
diseased conditional activities, but they have no information of activities
in the healthy condition. Those who are actually liberated and in full
knowledge take to hearing the activities of Kr !la ; such engagement is pure
spiritual activity.
It is essential for persons who are actually liberated to hear about the
pastimes of Kr !la· That is the supreme relishable subject matter for one in
Introduction XXI
the liberated state. Also, if persons who are trying to be liberated hear
such narrations as Bhagavad-gita and Srimad-Bhiigavatam, then their path
of liberation becomes very clear. Bhagavad-gitii is the preliminary study of
Srimad-Bhiigavatam. By studying the Gitii, one becomes fully conscious
of the position of Lord KH a; and when he is situated at the lotus feet of
Kr  a, he understands the narrations of KH a as described in the Srimad
Bhiigavatam. Lord Caitanya has therefore advised His followers that their
business is to propagate Kr rz.a kathii.
Krsna-kathii means narrations about Krsna. There are two Krsna-kathiis:. .. . .. ...
narrations spoken by K[§!W and narrations spoken about K[§!W. Bhagavad-
gita is the narration or the philos hy or the science of God, spoken by
.Kfwa Himself. Srimad-Bhiigavatam is the narration about the activities
and transcendental pastimes of Kr  a. Both are K[§[W-katha. It is the order
of Lord Caitanya that Kr rz.a-katha should be spread all over the world,
because if the conditioned souls, suffering under the pangs of material
existence, take to Kr§!z.a-katha, then their path of liberation will be open
and clear. The purpose of presenting this book is primarily to induce
people to understand Kn a or K[§[W-katha, because thereby they can
become freed from material bondage.
This Kr ra-katha will also be very much appealing to the most material
istic persons because Krwa's pastimes with the gopis (cowherd girls) are
exactly like the loving affairs between young girls and boys within this
material world. Actually, the sex feeling found in human society is not
unnatural because this same sex feeling is there in the original Personality
of Godhead. The pleasure potency is called Srimati Radhara i. The
attraction of loving affairs on the basis of sex feeling is the original feature
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and we, the conditioned souls,
being part and parcel of the Supreme, have such feelings also, but they are
experienced within a perverted, minute condition. Therefore, when those
who are after sex life in this material world hear about Kr  a's pastimes
with the gopis, they will relish transcendental pleasure, although it appears
to be materialistic. The advantage will be that they will gradually be
elevated to the spiritual platform. In the Bhiigavatam it is stated that if
one hears the pastimes of Lord Kr  a with the gopis from authorities with
submission, then he will be promoted to the platform of transcendental
loving service to the Lord, and the material disease of lust within his heart
will be completely vanquished. In other words, it will counteract the
material sex life.
Kr  a will be appealing to the liberated souls and to persons who are
trying to be liberated, as well as to the gross, conditioned materialist.
XXII Kr !la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
According to the statement of Maharaja Parik it, who heard about
Kr  a from Sukadeva Gosvami, K[Hta-katha is equally applicable to every
human being, in whatever condition of life he is in. Everyone will appre
ciate it to the highest magnitude. But Maharaja PanK. it also warned that
persons who are simply engaged in killing animals and in killing themselves
may .not be very much attracted to K[Hta-katha. In other words, ordinary
persons who are following the regulative moral principles of scriptures, no
matter in what condition they are found, will certainly be attracted, but
not persons who are killing themselves. The exact word used in the Srimad
Bhiigavatam is pasughna, which means killing animals or killing oneself.
Persons who are not self-realized and who are not interested in spiritual
realization are killing themselves; they are committing suicide. Because
this human form of life is especially meant for self-realization, by neg
lecting this important part of his activities, one simply wastes his time
like the animals. So he is pasughna. The other meaning of the word refers
to those who are actually killing animals. This means persons who are
animal eaters (even dog eaters), and they are all engaged in killing animals
in so many ways, such as hunting, opening slaughterhouses, etc. Such
persons cannot be interested in Knrw-katha.
King· PanK. it was especially interested in hearing Kr rta-katha because
he knew that his forefathers and particularly his grandfather, Arjuna, were
victorious in. the great battle of Kuruk etra only because of Kr  a. We
may also take this material world as a battlefield of Kuruk etra. Everyone
is struggling hard for existence in this battlefield, and at every step there is
danger. According to Maharaja Parik it, the battlefield of Kuruk etra was
just like a vast ocean full of dangerous animals. His grandfather Arjuna had
to fight with such great heroes as Bhi ma, Dro a, Kar a, and many others
who were not ordinary fighters. Such warriors have been compared to the
timingila fish in the ocean. The timingila fish can very easily swallow up
big whales. The great fighters on the battlefield of Kuruk etra could
swallow many, many Arjunas very easily, but simply due to Kr  a's mercy,
Arjuna was able to kill all of them. Just as one can cross with no exertion
oveflhe little pit of water contained in the hoofprint of a calf, so Arjuna,
by the grace of Kr ga, was able to very easily jump over the ocean of the
battle of Kuruk etra.
Maharaja Parik it very much appreciated Kr  a's activities for many
other reasons. Not only was his grandfather saved by Kr  a, but he himself
also was saved by Kr  a. At the end of 'the battle of Kuruk etra, all the
me ers of the Kuru dynasty, both the sons and grandsons on the side
of Dhftara tra, as well as those on the side of the Pa l)avas, died in the
Introduction XXlll
fighting. Except the five Pa  ava brothers, everyone died on the battlefield
of Kuru etra. Maharaja Parik§it was at that time within the embryo of his
mother. His father, Abhimanyu, the son of Arjuna, also died on the battle
field of Kuruk§etra, and so Maharaja Parik§it was a posthumous child.
When he was in the womb of his mother, a b ahmiistra weapon was released
by Asvatthama to kill the child. When Pari'k§it Maharaja's mother, U ttara,
approached Kr§ a, Kr§ a, seeing the danger of abortion, entered her womb
as the Supersoul and saved Maharaja Parik il. Maharaja Parik§it's other
name is Vi§ urata because he was saved by Lord Vi§ U Himself while still
within the womb.
Thus everyone, in any condition of life, should be interested in hearing
about Kr§ la and His activities because He is the Supreme Absolute Truth,
the Personality of Godhead. He is all-pervading; He is living within every
one's heart, and He is living as His universal form. And yet, as described in
the Bhagavad-gitii, He appears as He is in the human society just to invite
everyone to His transcendental abode, back to home, back to Godhead.
Everyone should be interested in knowing about Kr§ a, and this book is
presented with this purpose: that people may know about Kr  a and be
perfectly benefitted in this human form of life.
In the Ninth Canto of Srimad-Bhiigavatam, Sri Baladeva is described as
the son of Rohi i, a wife of Vasudeva. Vasudeva, the father of Kr§ a, had
sixteen wives, and one of them was Rohi i, the mother of Balarama. But
Balarama is also described as the son of Devaki, so how could He be the
son of both Devaki and Rohi i? This was one of the questions put by
Maharaja Parik it to Sukadeva Gosvami, and it will be answered in due
course. Maharaja Parik it also asked Sukadeva Gosvami why Sri Krwa, just
after His appearance as the son of Vasudeva, was immediately carried to
the house of Nanda Maharaja in Vrndavana, Gokula. He also wanted to
know what the activities of Lord Kr  a were while He was in Vrndavana
and while He was in Mathura. Besides that, he was especially inquisitive
to know why Kr  a killed His maternal uncle, Karitsa. Karitsa, being the
brother of His mother, was a very intimate superior to Kr§ a, so how was
it that He killed Karitsa? Also, he asked how many years Lord Kr§ a
remained in human society, how many years He reigned over the kingdom
of Dvaraka, and how many wives He accepted there. A k§atriya king is
gerterally accustomed to accept more than one wife; therefore Maharaja
Parik§it also inquired about His number of wives. The subject matter of
this book is Sukadeva Gosvami's answering of these and other questions
asked by Maharaja Parik§it.
The position of Maharaja Parik§it and Sukadeva Gosvami is unique.
XXIV Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Maharaja Parik it is the right person to hear about the transcendental
pastimes of Kr tta, and Sukadeva Gosvami is the right person to describe
them. If such a fortunate combination is made possible, then Kr§r-a-kathii
immediately becomes revealed, and people may benefit to the highest
possible degree from such a conversation.
This narration was presented by Sukadeva Gosvami when Maharaja
Parik it .was prepared to give up his body, fasting on the bank of the
Ganges. In order to assure Sukadeva Gosvami that by hearing Kr§rw-kathii
he would not feel tired, Maharaja Parik it expressed himself very frankly:
"Hunger and thirst may give trouble to ordinary persons or to me, but
the topics of Krwa are so nice that one can continue to hear about them
without feeling tired because such hearing situates one in the transcendental
position." It is understood that one must be very fortunate to hear about
Krnw-kathii seriously, like Maharaja Parik it. He was especially intent on
the subject matter because he was expecting death at any moment. Every
one of us should be conscio]lS of death at every moment. This life is not at
all assured; at any time one can die. It does not matter whether one is a
young man or an old man. So before death takes place, we must be fully
Krsna conscious.
. At the point of his death, King Parik it was hearing Srimad-Bhiigavatam
from Sukadeva Gosvami. When King Parik it expressed his untiring desire
to hear about Kr tta, Sukadeva Gosvami was very pleased. Sukadeva was
the greatest of all Bhiigavata reciters, and thus he began to speak about
Krwa's pastimes, which destroy all inauspiciousness in this age of Kali.
Sukadeva Gosvami thanked the King for his eagerness to hear about Kr tta,
and he encouraged him by saying, "My dear King, your intelligence is v -- 
keen because you are so eager to hear about the pastimes of Kr tta." h-::
informed MaharaJa Parik it that hearing and chanting of the pastimes of
Kr tta are so auspicious that the process purifies the three varieties of
men involved: he who recites the transcendental topics of Kf J}a, he who
hears such topics, and he who inquires about Him. These pastimes are just
like the Ganges water which flows from the toe of Lord Vi ttu: they purify
the three worlds, the upper, middle and lower planetary systems.
l I Advent of Lord Krsna• • •
Once the world was overburdened by the unnecessary defense force of
different kings, who were actually demons, but were posing themselves
as the royal order. At that time, the whole world became perturbed, and
the predominating deity of this earth, known as Bhiimi, went to see Lord
Brahma to tell of her calamaties due to the demoniac kings. Bhiimi
assumed the shape of a cow and presented herself before Lord Brahma
with tears in her eyes. She was bereaved and was weeping just to invoke
the Lord's compassion. She related the calamitous position of the earth,
and after hearing this, Lord Brahma became mu h aggrieved, and he at
once started for the ocean of milk, where Lord Visnu resides. Lord Brahma
was accompanied by all the demigods headed by Lord Siva, and Bhiimi
also followed. Arriving on the shore of the milk ocean, Lord Brahma began
to pacify the Lord Vi pu who formerly saved the earthly planet by
assuming the transcendental form of a boar.
In the Vedic mantras, there is a particular type of prayer called Puru§a
silkta. Generally, the demigods offer their obeisances unto Vi pu, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, by chanting the Puru§a-silk ta. It is under
stood herein that the predominating deity of every planet can see the
supreme lord of this universe, Brahma, whenever there is some distur
bance in his planet. And Brahma can approach the Supreme Lord Vi pu,
not by seeing Him directly, but by standing on the shore of the ocean of
milk. There is a planet within this universe called Sve tadvipa, and on that
planet there is an ocean of milk. It is understood from various Vedic
literatures that just as there is the ocean of salt water within this planet,
there are various kinds of oceans in other planets. Somewhere there is an
ocean of milk, somewhere there is an ocean of oil, and somewhere there is
an ocean of liquor and many other types of oceans. Puru§a-silkta is the
standard prayer which the demigods recite to appease the Supreme Per-
1
2 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
sonality of Godhead, K irodakasayi-Vi  u. Because He is lying on the
ocean of milk, He is called K irodakasayi-Vi  u. He is the Supreme Person
ality of Godhead, through whom all the incarnations within this universe '
appear.
After all the demigods offered the Pum§a-siikta prayer to the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, they apparently heard no response. Then Lord
Brahma personally sat in meditation, and there was a message-transmission
from Lord Vi  u to Brahma. Brahma then b roadcast the message to the
demigods. That is the system of receiving Vedic knowledge. The Vedic
knowledge is received first by Brahma from the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, through the medium of the heart. As stated in the beginning of
Srimad-Bhiigavatam, tene brahma hrdii : the transcendental knowledge of
the Vedas was transmitted to Lord Brahma through the heart. Here also,
in the same way, only Brahm a could understand the message transmitted
by Lord Vi  u, and he broadcast it to the demigods for their immediate
action. The message was: the Supreme Personality of Godhead will appear
on the earth very soon along with His supreme powerful potencies, and as
long as He remains on the earth planet to execute His mission of annihi
lating the demons and establishing the devotees, the demigods should also
remain there to assist Him. They should all immediately take birth in the
family of the Yadu dynasty, wherein the Lord will also appear in due
course of time.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, Kr l).a, personally ap
peared as the son of V asudeva. Before He appeared, all the demigods,
along with their wives, appeared in different pious families in the world
just to assist the Lord in executing His mission. The exact word used here
is tatpriyiirtham, which means the demigods should appear on the earth in
order to please the Lord. In other words, any living entity who lives only
to satisfy the Lord is a demigod. The demigods were further informed that
the plenary portion of Lord Kr va, Ananta, who is maintaining the uni
versal planets by extending his millions of hoods, would also appear on
earth before Lord Kr  a's appearance. They were also informed that the
external potency of Vi  u (miiyii), with whom all the conditioned souls
are enamoured, would also appear just to execute the purpose of the
Supreme Lord.
After instructing and pacifying all the demigods, as well as Bhumi, with
sweet words, Lord Brahma, the father of all prajiipatis, or progenitors of
universal population, departed for his own abode, the highest material
planet, called Brahmaloka.
The leader of the Y adu dynasty, King Surasena, was ruling over the
Advent of Lord Kr  a 3
country known as Mathura (the district of Mathura) as well as the
district known as Siirasena. On account of the rule of King Sii_rasena,
Mathura became the capital city of all the kings of the Y adus. Mathura was
also made the capital of the kings of the Yadu dynasty because the Yadus
were a very pious family and knew that Mathura is the place where Lord
Sri Kr  a lives eternally, just as He also lives in D varaka.
Once upon a time, Vasudeva, the son of Siirasena, just after marrying
D evaki, was going home on his chariot with his newly wedded wife. The
father of D evaki, known as D evaka, had contributed a sufficient dowery
because he was very affectionate toward his daughter. He had contributed
hundreds of chariots completely decorated with gold equipment. At that
time, Karhsa, the son of Ugrasena, in order to please his sister, D evaki, had
voluntarily taken the reins of the horses of Vasudeva's chariot and was
driving. According to the custom of the Vedic civilization, when a girl is
married, the brother takes the sister and brother-in-law to their home.
Because the newly married girl may feel too much separation from her
father's family, the brother goes with her until she reaches her father-in
law's house. The full dowery contributed by D evaka was as follows : 400
elephants fully decorated with golden garlands, 1 5 ,000 decorated horses,
and 1800 chariots. He also arranged for two hundred beautiful girls to
follow his daughter. The k atriya system of marriage, still current in
India, dictates that when a k atriya is married, a few dozen of the bride's
young girl friends (in addition to the bride) go to the house of the king.
The followers of the queen are called maidservants, but actually they act
as friends of the queen. This practice is prevalent from time immemorial,
traceable at least to the time before the advent of Lord Kr  a 5 ,000 years
ago . So Vasudeva brought home another two hundred beautiful girls along
with his wife.
While the bride and bridegroom were passing along on the chariot,
there were different kinds of musical instruments playing to indicate the
auspicious moment. There were conchshells, bugles, drums and kettle
drums ; combined together, they were vibrating a nice concert. The pro
cession was passing very pleasingly, and Karhsa was driving the chariot,
when suddenly there was a miraculous sound vibrated from the sky which
especially announced to Karhsa : "Karhsa : you are such a fool. You are
driving the chariot of your sister and your brother-in-law, but you do not
know that the eighth child of this sister will kill you. "
Karhsa was the son of Ugrasena, of the Bhoja dynasty. It is said that
Karhsa was the most demonic of all the Bhoja dynasty kings. Immediately
after hearing the prophecy from the sky, he caught hold of D evaki's hair
4 Kf  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and was just about to kill her with his sword. Vasudeva was astonished at
Kamsa's behavior, and in order to pacify the cruel, shameless brother-in
law, he began to speak as follows, with great reason and evidence. He said,
"My dear brother-in-law Kamsa, you are the most famous king of the
Bhoja dynasty, and people know that you are the greatest warrior and a
valiant king. How is it that you are so infuriated that you are prepared to
kill a woman who is your own sister at this auspicious time of her marriage?
Why should you be so much afraid of death? Death is already born along
with your birth. From the very day you took your birth, you began to die.
Suppose you are twenty-five years old; that means you have already died
twenty-five years. Every moment, every second, you are dying. Why then
should you be so much afraid of death? Final death is inevitable. You
may die either today or in a hundred years; you cannot avoid death. Why
should you be so much afraid? Actually, death means annihilation of the
present body. As soon as the present body stops functioning and mixes
with the five elements of material nature, the living entity within the body
accepts another body, according to his present action and reaction. It is
just as when a man walks on the street; he puts forward his foot, and when
he is confident that his foot is situated on sound ground, he lifts the other
foot. In this way, one after another, the body changes and the soul
transmigrates. See how the plantworms change from one twig to another
so carefully! Similarly, the living entity changes his body as soon as the
higher authorities decide on his next body. As long as a living entity is
conditioned within this material world, he must take material bodies one
after another. His next particular body is offered by the laws of nature,
according to the actions and reactions of this life.
"This body is exactly like one of the bodies which we always see in
dreams. During our dream of sleep, we create so many bodies according to
mental creation. We have seen gold and we have also seen a mountain, so
in a dream we can see a golden mountain by combining the two ideas.
Sometimes in dreams, we see that we have a body which is flying in the
sky, and at that time we completely forget our present body. Similarly,
these bodies are changing. When you have one body, you forget the past
body. During a dream, we may make contact with so many new kinds of
bodies, but when we are awake we forget them all. And actually these
material bodies are the creations of our mental activities. But at the present
moment we do not recollect our past bodies.
"The nature of the mind is flickering. Sometimes it accepts something,
and immediately it rejects the same thing. Accepting and rejecting is the
process of the mind in contact with the five objects of sense gratification:
Advent of Lord Kr  a 5
form, taste, smell, sound, and touch. In its speculative way, the mind
comes in touch with the objects of sense gratification, and when th  living
entity desires a particular type of body, he gets it. Therefore, the body is
an offering by the laws of material nature. The living entity accepts a body
and comes out again into the material world to enjoy or suffer according
to the construction of the body. U nless we have a particular type of body,
we cannot enjoy or suffer according to our mental proclivities inherited
from the previous life. The particular type of body is actually offered to
us according to our mental condition at the time of death.
"The luminous planets like the sun, moon or the stars reflect themselves
in different types of reservoirs, like water, oil or ghee. The reflection
moves according to the movement of the reservoir. The reflection of the
moon is on the water, and the moving water makes the moon also appear
to be moving, but actually the moon is not moving. Similarly, by mental
concoction, the living entity attains different kinds of bodies, although
actually he has no connection with such bodies. But on account of illusion,
being enchanted by the influence of miiyii, the living entity thinks that
he belongs to a particular type of body. That is the way of conditioned
life. Suppose a living entity is now in a human form of body. He thinks
that he belongs to the human community, or a particular country or
particular place. He identifies himself in that way and unnecessarily
prepares for another body which is not required by him. Such desires and
mental concoctions are the cause of different types of body. The covering
influence of material nature is so strong that the living entity is satisfied
in whatever body he gets, and he identifies with that body with great
pleasure. Therefore, I beg to request you not to be overwhelmed by the
dictation of your mind and body."
Vasudeva thus requested Kamsa not to be envious of his newly married
sister. One should not be envious of anyone because envy is the cause of
fear both in this world and in the next when one is before Y amaraja (the
lord of punishment after death). Vasudeva appealed to Kamsa on behalf of
Devaki, stating that she was his younger sister. He also appealed at an
auspicious moment, at the time of marriage. A younger sister or brother
are supposed to be protected as one's children. "The position is overall so
delicate," Vasudeva reasoned, "that if you kill her, it will go against your
high reputation."
Vasudeva tried to pacify Kamsa by good instruction as well as by
philosophical discrimination, but Kamsa was not to be pacified because
his association was demoniac. Because of his demoniac associations, he
was always a demon, although born in a very high royal family. A demon
6 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
never cares for any good instruction. He is just like a determined thief:
one can give him moral instruction, but it will not be effective. Similarly,
those who are demoniac or atheistic by nature can hardly assimilate any
good instruction, however authorized it may be. That is the difference
between demigod and demon. Those who can accept good instruction and
try to live their lives in that way are called demigods, and those who are
unable to take such good instruction are called demons. Failing in his
attempt to pacify Kamsa, Vasudeva wondered how he would protect his
wife Devaki. When there is imminent danger, an intelligent person should
try to avoid the dangerou_, position as far as possible. But if, in spite of
endeavoring by all intelligence, one fails to avoid the dangerous position,
there is no fault on his part. One should try his best to execute his duties,
but if the attempt fails, he is not at fault.
Vasudeva thought of his wife as follows : "For the present let me save
the life of Devaki, then later on, if there are children, I shall see how to
save them." He further thought, "If in the future I get a child who can kill
Kamsa-just as Kamsa is thinking-then both Devaki and the child will be
saved because the law of Providence is inconceivable. But now, some way
or other, let me save the life of Devaki."
There is no certainty how a living entity contacts a certain type of
body, just as there is no certainty how the blazing fire comes in contact
with a certain type of wood in the forest. When there is a forest fire, it is
experienced that the blazing fire sometimes leaps over one tree and catches
another by the influence of the wind. Similarly, a living entity may be very
careful and fearful in the matter of executing his duties, but it is still very
difficult for him to know what type of body he is going to get in the next
life. Maharaja Bharata was very faithfully executing the duties of self
realization, but by chance he contacted temporary affection for a deer,
and he had to accept his next life in the body of a deer.
Vasudeva, after deliberating on how to save his wife, began to speak to
Kamsa with great respect, although Kamsa was the most sinful man. Some
times it happens that a most virtuous person like Vasudeva has to flatter a
person like Kamsa, a most vicious person. That is the way of all diplomatic
transactions. Although Vasudeva was deeply aggrieved, he presented him
self outwardly as cheerful. He addressed the shameless Kamsa in that way
because he was so atrocious. Vasudeva said to Kamsa, "My dear brother
in-law, please consider that you have no danger from your sister. You are
awaiting some danger because you have heard a prophetic voice in the sky.
But the danger is to come from the sons of your sister, who are not present
now. And who knows? There may or may not be sons in the future.
Advent of Lord Kr  a 7
Considering all this, you are safe for the present. Nor is there cause of fear
from your sister. If there are any sons born of her, I promise that I shall
present all of them to you for necessary action."
Kamsa knew the value of Vasudeva's word of honor, and he was con
vinced by his argument. For the time being, he desisted from the heinous
killing of his sister. Thus Vasudeva was pleased and praised the decision of
Kamsa. In this way, he returned to his home.
After due course of time, Vasudeva and D evaki gave birth to eight male
children, as well as one daughter. When the first son was born, Vasudeva
kept his word of honor and immediately brought the child before Kamsa.
It is said that Vasudeva was very much elevated and famous for his word
of honor, and he wanted to maintain this fame. Although it was very
painful for Vasudeva to hand over the newly born child, Kamsa was very
glad to receive him. But he became a little compassionate with the behavior
of Vasudeva. This event is very exemplary. For a great soul like Vasudeva ,
there is nothing considered to be painful in the course of discharging one's
duty. A learned person like Vasudeva carries out his duties without
hesitation. On the other hand, a demon like Kamsa never hesitates in
committing any abominable action. It is said, therefore, that a saintly
person can tolerate all kinds of miserable conditions of life , a learned man
can discharge his duties without awaiting favorable circumstances, a
heinous person like Kamsa can act in any sinful way, and a devotee can
sacrifice everything to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Kamsa became satisfied by the action of Vasudeva. He was surprised to
see Vasudeva keeping his promise , and being compassionate upon him and
pleased, he began to speak as follows: " My dear Vasudeva, you need not
present this child to me. I am not in danger from this child. I have heard
that the eighth child born of you and D evaki will kill me. Why should I
accept this child unnecessarily? You can take him back."
When Vasudeva was returning home with his first-born child, although
he was pleased by the behavior of Kamsa, he could not believe in him
because he knew that Kamsa was uncontrolled. An atheistic person cannot
be firm in his word of honor. One who cannot control the senses cannot
be steady in his determination. The great politician, Ca akya Pa!lc;lit, said,
"Never put your trust in a diplomat or in a woman." Those who are
addicted to unrestricted sense gratification can never be truthful, nor can
they be trusted with any faith.
At that time the great sage Narada came to Kamsa. He was informed of
Karhsa's becoming compassionate to Vasudeva and returning his first-born
child. Narada was very anxious to accelerate the descent of Lord Kr !la as
8 Kf J.la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
soon as possible. He therefore informed Kamsa that personalities like
Nanda Maharaja and all the cowherd men and girls and the wives of the
cowherd men in Vrndavana, and, on the other side, Vasudeva, his father
Surasena and all his relatives born in the family of Vn i of the Yadu
Dynasty, were preparing for the appearance of the Lord. Narada warned
Kamsa to be careful of the friends and well-wishers and all the demigods
taking birth in those families. Kamsa and his friends and advisors were all
demons. Demons are always afraid of demigods. After being thus informed
by Narada about the appearance of the demigods in different families,
Kamsa at once became alert. He understood that since the demigods had
already appeared, Lord Viwu must be coming soon. He at once arrested
both his brother-in-law Vasudeva and Devaki and put them behind prison
bars.
Within the prison, shackled in iron chains, Vasudeva and Devaki gave
birth to a male child year after year, and Kamsa, thinking each of the
babies to be the incarnation of Viwu, killed them one after another. He
was particularly afraid of the eighth child, but after the visit of Narada, he
came to the conclusion that any child might be Kr  a. Therefore it was
better to kill all the babies who took birth of Devaki and Vasudeva.
This action of Kamsa is not very difficult to understand. There are
many instances in the history of the world of persons in the royal order
who have killed father, brother, or a whole family and friends for the
satisfaction of their ambitions. There is nothing astonishing about this, for
the demoniac can kill anyone for their nefarious ambitions.
Kamsa was made aware of his previous birth by the grace of Narada. He
learned that in his previous birth he was a demon of the name Kalanemi
and that he was killed by Vi  u. Having taken his birth in the Bhoja
family, he decided to become the deadly enemy of the Yadu dynasty;
Kr  a was going to take birth in that family, and Kamsa was very much
afraid that he would be killed by Kn a, just as he was killed in his last
birth.
He first of all imprisoned his father U grasena because he was the chief
king among the Yadu, Bhoja, and Andhaka dynasties, and he also oc
cupied the kingdom of Surasena, Vasudeva's father. He declared himself
the king of all such places.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the First Chapter of Kr  a,
''A dvent of Lord K[§!W. "
2 I Prayers by the Demigods
for Lord Krsna in the W omh• • •
King Kamsa not only occupied the kingdoms of the Y adu, Bhoja, and
Andhaka dynasties and the kingdom of S urasena , but he also made alli
ances with all the other demoniac kings, as follows : the demon Pralamba,
demon Baka, demon Ca!liira, demon Tr!lavarta, demon Aghasura, demon
Mu tika, demon Ari ta, demon Dvivida, demon Piitana, demon Kesi and
demon D henuka. At that time, Jarasandha was the king of Magadha
province (known at present as Behar state). Thus by his diplomatic policy,
Kamsa consolidated the most powerful kingdom of his time, under the
protection of Jarasandha. He made further alliances with such kings as
Ba!lasura and Bhaumasura, until he was the strongest. Then he began to
behave most inimically towards the Y adu dynasty into which Kr !la was
to take His birth.
Being harassed by Kamsa, the kings of the Y adu , Bhoj a and Andhaka
dynasties began to take shelter in different states such as the state of the
Kurus, the state of the Paficalas and the states known as Kekaya, Salva,
Vidarbha, Ni adha, Videha and Kosala. Kamsa broke the solidarity of the
Y adu Kingdom, as well as the Bhoj a and Andhaka. He made his position
the most solid within the vast tract of land known at that time as
Bharatavar a.
When Kamsa killed the six babies of D evaki and Vasudeva one after
another, many friends and relatives of Kariisa approached him and re
quested him to discontinue these heinous activities. But all of them became
worshipers of Kamsa.
When D evaki became pregnant for the seventh time, a plenary expansion
of Kr !la known as Ananta appeared within h r womb. D evaki was over
whelmed both with jubilation and lamentation. She was j oyful, for she
could understand that Lord Vi !IU had taken shelter within her womb , but
at the same time she was sorry that as soon as her child would come out,
9
10 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Kamsa would kill Him. At that time, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Kr  a, being compassionate upon the fearful condition of the Yadus, due
to atrocities committed by Kamsa, ordered the appearance of His
Yogamiiya, or His internal potency. Krwa is the Lord of the universe, but
He is especially the Lord of the Yadu dynasty.
This Yogamaya is the principal potency of the Personality of Godhead.
In the Vedas it is stated that the Lord, the Supreme Personality of God
head, has multipotencies. Parasya saktir vividhaiva sriiyate. All the dif
ferent potencies are acting externally and internally, and Yogamaya is the
chief of all potencies. He ordered the appearance of Yogamaya in the land
of Vrajabhumi, in Vrndavana, which is always decorated and full with
beautiful cows. In Vrndavana, Rohi i, one of the wives of Vasudeva, was
residing at the house of King Nanda and Queen Yasoda. Not only Rohi i,
but many others in the Yadu dynasty were scattered all over the country
due to their fear of the atrocities of Kamsa. Some of them were even
living in the caves of the mountains.
The Lord thus informed Yogamaya: "Under the imprisonment of
Kamsa are Devaki and Vasudeva, and at the present moment, My plenary
expansion, Se a, is within the womb of Devaki. You can arrange the
transfer of Se a from the womb of Devaki to the womb of Rohi . After
this arrangement, I am personally going to appear in the womb of Devaki
with My full potencies. Then I shall appear as the son of Devaki and
Vasudeva. And you shall appear as the daughter of Nanda and Yasoda in
Vrndavana.
"Since you will appear as My contemporary sister, people within the
world will worship you with all kinds of valuable presentations: incense,
candles, flowers and offerings of sacrifice. You shall quickly satisfy their
desires for sense gratification. People who are after materialistic affection
will worship you under the different forms of your expansions, which
will be named Durga, Bhadrakali, Vijaya, Vai  avi, Kumuda, Ca  ika,
Kr  a, Madhavi, Kanyaka, Maya, Naraya i, Isani, Sarada and Ambika."
Kr  a and Yogamaya appeared as brother and sister-the Supreme
Powerful and the supreme power. Although there is no clear distinction
between the Powerful and the power, power is always subordinate to the
PowerfuL Those who are materialistic are worshippers of the power, but
those who are transcendentalists are worshippers of the PowerfuL Kr  a is
the Supreme Powerful, and Durga is the supreme power within the material
world. Actually people in the Vedic culture worship both the Powerful and
the power. There are many hundreds of thousands of temples of Vi  u
and Devi, and sometimes they are worshipped simultaneously. The wor-
Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Kr "!la in the Womb 1 1
shipper of the power; Durga; o r the external energy of Kr  a; may _achieve
all kinds of material success very easily; but anyone who wants to be
elevated transcendentally must engage in worshipping the Powerful in
Krsna consciousness.. . .
The Lord also declared to Yogamiiyii that His plenary expansion, Ananta
Se a; was within the womb of Devaki. On account of being forcibly
attracted to the womb of Rohi i; He would be known as Sankar a a and
would be the source of all spiritual power or bala, by which one could be
able to attain the highest bliss of life which is called ramara. Therefore the
plenary portion Ananta would be known after His appearance either as
Sankar a!la or Balarama.
In the Upani§ads it is stated; Niiyam iitma bala hinena labhya. The
purport is that one cannot attain the Supreme or any form of self
realization without being sufficiently favored by Balarama. Bala does not
mean physical strength. No one can attain spiritual perfection by physical
strength. One must have the spiritual strength which is infused by Balarama
or Sankar a a. Ananta or Se§a is the power which sustains all the planets
in their different positions. Materially this sustaining power is known as
the law of gravitation, but actually it is the display of the potency of
Sankar§a a. Balarama or Sankar§a a is spiritual power; or the original
spiritual master. Therefore Lord Nityananda Prabhu, who is also the incar
nation of Balarama, is the original spiritual master. And the spiritual
master is the representative of Balarama, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who supplies spiritual strength. In the Caitanya-caritiimrta it is
confirmed that the spiritual master is the manifestation of the mercy of
Krsna.. . .
When Yogamiiyii was thus ordered by the Supreme Personality of God-
head, she circumambulated the Lord and then appeared within this material
world according to His order. When the Supreme Powerful Personality of
Godhead transferred Lord Se§a from the womb of Devaki to the womb of
Rohipi, both of them were under the spell of Yogamiiyii, which is also
called yoga-nidrii. When this was done, people understood that Devaki's
seventh pregnancy was a miscarriage. Thus although Balarama appeared as
the son of Devaki, He was transferred to the womb of Rohi i to appear as
her son. After this arrangement; the Supreme Personality of Godhead;
Kr  a; who is always ready to place His full potencies in His unalloyed
devotees, entered as the Lord of the whole creation within the mind of
Vasudeva. It is understood in this connection that Lord Krsna first of all. . .
situated Himself in the unalloyed heart of Devaki. He was not put into the
womb of Devaki by seminal discharge. The Supreme Personality of God-
12 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
head, by His inconceivable potency, can appear in any way. It is not
necessary for Him to appear in the ordinary way by seminal injection
within the womb of a woman.
When Vasudeva was sustaining the form of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead within his heart, he appeared just like the glowing sun whose
shining rays are always unbearable and scorching to the common man.
The form of the Lord situated in the pure unalloyed heart of Vasudeva is
not different from the original form of Krwa. The appearance of the form
of Krwa anywhere, and specifically within the heart, is called dhiima.
Dhiima does not only refer to Kr  a's form, but His name, His form, His
quality and His paraphernalia. Everything becomes manifest simulta
neously.
Thus the eternal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with full
potencies was transferred from the mind of Vasudeva to the mind of
Devaki, exactly as the setting sun's rays are transferred to the full moon
rising in the east.
Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, entered the body of Devaki
from the body of Vasudeva. He was beyond the conditions of the ordinary
living entity. When Krwa is there, it is to be understood that all His
plenary expansions, such as Naraya a, and incarnations like Lord Nrsimha,
Varaha, etc., are with Him, and they are not subject to the conditions of
material existence. In this way, Devaki became the residence of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who is one without a second and the
cause of all creation. Devaki became the residence of the Absolute Truth,
but because she was within the house of Kamsa, she looked just like a
supressed fire, or like misused education. When fire is covered by the walls
of a pot or is kept in a jug, the illuminating rays of the fire cannot be very
much appreciated. Similarly, misused knowledge, which does not benefit
the people in general, is not very much appreciated. So Devaki was kept
within the prison walls of Kamsa's palace, and no one could see her tran
scendental beauty which resulted from her conceiving the Supreme Per
sonality of Godhead.
Kamsa, however, saw the transcendental beauty of his sister Devaki, and
he at once concluded that the Supreme Personality of Godhead had taken
shelter in her womb. She had never before looked so wonderfully beautiful.
He could distinctly understand that there was something wonderful within
the womb of Devaki. In this way, Kamsa became perturbed. He was sure
that the Supreme Personality of Godhead would kill him in the future and
that He had now come. Kamsa began to think: "What is to be done with
Devaki? Surely she has Vi !lu or Kr  a within her womb, so it is certain
Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Kr a in the Womb 1 3
that Kr tta has come to execute the mission of the demigods. And even if
I immediately kill Devaki, His mission cannot be frustrated.'' Kamsa knew
very well that no one can frustrate the purpose of Vi .pu. Any intelligent
man can understand that the laws of God cannot be violated. His purpose
will be served in spite of all impediments offered by the demons. Kamsa
thought: "If I kill Devaki at the present moment, V i .pu will enforce His
supreme will more vehemently. To kill Devaki just now would be a most
abominable act. No one desires to kill his reputation, even in an awkward
situation; if I kill Devaki now, my reputation will be spoiled. Devaki is a
woman, and she is under my shelter; she is pregnant, and if I kill her,
immediately all my reputation, the result of pious activities and duration
of life, will be finished."
He also further deliberated: "A person who is too cruel, even in this
lifetime is as good as dead. No one likes a cruel person during his lifetime,
and after' his death, people curse him. On account of his self-identification
with the body, he must he degraded and pushed into the darkest region of
helL" Kamsa thus meditated on all the pros and cons of killing Devaki at
that time.
Kamsa finally decided not to kill Devaki right away hut to wait for the
inevitable future. But his mind became absorbed in animosity against the
Personality of Godhead. He patiently waited for the deliverance of the
child, expecting to kill Him, as he had done previously with the other
babies of Devaki. Thus being merged in the ocean of animosity against the
Personality of Godhead, he began to think of Kr .pa and V i .pu while
sitting, while sleeping, while walking, while eating, while working-in all
the situations of his life. His mind became so much absorbed with the
thought of the Supreme Personality of Godhead that indirectly he could
see only Kr .pa or Vi .pu around him. U nfortunately, although his mind
was so absorbed in the thought of Vi .pu, he is not recognized as a devotee
because he was thinking of Kn.pa as an enemy. The state of mind of a great
devotee is also to be always absorbed in Kn.pa, but a devotee thinks of
Him favorably, not unfavorably. To think of Kn.pa favorably is Krwa
consciousness, hut to think of Kr .pa unfavorably is not Kr .pa conscious
ness.
At this time Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, accompanied by great sages
like Narada and followed by many other demigods, invisibly appeared in
the house of Kamsa. They began to pray for the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in select prayers which are very pleasing to the devotees and
which award fulfillment of their desires. The first words they spoke
acclaimed that the Lord is true to His vow. As stated in the Bhagavad-gitii,
14 Kf l)a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Kf pa descends in this material world just to protect the pious and destroy
the impious. That is His vow. The demigods could understand that the
Lord had taken His residence within the womb of Devaki in order to fulfill
this vow. The demigods were very glad that the Lord was appearing to
fulfill His mission; and they addressed Him as satyam param, or the
Supreme Absolute Truth.
Everyone is searching after the truth. That is the philosophical way of
life. The demigods give information that the Supreme Absolute Truth is
KHpa. One who becomes fully Krwa conscious can attain the Absolute
Truth. Krsna is the Absolute Truth. Relative truth is not truth in all the. . .
three phases of eternal time. Time is divided into past, present and future.
Krwa is Truth always, past; present and future. In the material world
everything is being controlled by supreme time, in the course of past,
present and future. But before the creation; Kr pa was existing, and when
there is creation, everything is resting in Kr pa, and when this creation is
finished, Krwa will remain. Therefore, He is Absolute Truth in all circum
stances. If there is any truth within this material world, it emanates from
the Supreme Truth, Kr  a. If there is any opulence within this material
world, the cause of the opulence is Kr  a. If there is any reputation within
this material world; the cause of the reputation is Kr !la. If there is any
strength within this material world, the cause of such strength is Kr pa. If
there is any wisdom and education within this material world, the cause of
such wisdom and education is Kf pa. Therefore Kr  a is the source of all
relative truths.
This material world is composed of five principal elements: earth, water;
fire, air and ether; and all such elements are emanations from KHpa. The
material scientists accept these primary five elements as the cause of
material manifestation, but the elements in their gross and subtle states
are produced by Kr pa. The living entities who are working within this
material world are also products of His marginal potency. In the Seventh
Chapter of the Bhagavad-gitii, it is clearly stated that the whole manifesta
tion is a combination of two kinds of energies of Krwa, the superior energy
and the inferior energy. The living entities are the superior energy, and the
dead material elements are His inferior energy. In its dormant stage, every
thing remains in Knva.
The demigods continued to offer their respectful prayers unto the
supreme form of the Personality of Godhead, Knva, by analytical study of
the material manifestation. What is this material manifestation? It is just
like a tree. A tree stands on the ground. Similarly, the tree of the material
manifestation is standing on the ground of material nature. This material
Prayers by the Demigods for Lord KH!la in the Womb 15
manifestation is compared with a tree because a tree is ultimately_ cut off
in due course of time. A tree is called V[k§a. V[k§a means that thing which
will be ultimately cut off. Therefore, this tree of the material manifestation
cannot be accepted as the Ultimate Truth. The influence of time is on the
material manifestation, but Kr  a's body is eternal. He existed befort' the
material manifestation, He is existing while the material manifestation is
continuing, and when it will be dissolved, He will continue to exist.
The Katha Upani§ad also cites this example of the tree of material
manifestation standing on the ground of material nature. This tree has two
kinds of fruits, distress and _happiness. Those who are living on the tree of
the body are just like two birds. One bird is the localized aspect of KH!la
known as the Paramatma, and the other bird is the living entity. The living
entity is eating the fruits of this material manifestation. Sometimes he eats
the fruit of happiness, and sometimes he eats the fruit of distress. But the
other bird is not interested in eating the fruit of distress or happiness
because he is self-satisfied. The Katha Upani§ad states that one bird on the
tree of the body is eating the fruits, and the other bird is simply witnessing.
The roots of this tree extend in three directions. That means the root of ·
the tree is the three modes of material nature: goodness, passion and
ignorance. Just as the tree's root expands, so, by association of the modes
of material nature (goodness, passion and ignorance), one expands his
duration of material existence. The taste of the fruits are of four kinds:
religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and ultimately,
liberation. According to the different associations in the three modes of
material nature, the living entities are tasting different kinds of religiosity,
different kinds of economic development, different kinds of sense gratifi
cation and different kinds of liberation. Practically all material work is
performed in ignorance, but because there are three qualities, sometimes the
quality of ignorance is covered with goodness or passion. The taste of these
material fruits is accepted through five senses. The five sense organs
through which knowledge is acquired are subjected to six kinds of whips:
lamentation, illusion, infirmity, death, hunger and thirst. This material
body, or the material manifestation, is covered by seven layers: skin,
muscle, flesh, marrow, bone, fat and semina. The branches of the tree are
eight: earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and ego. There are
nine gates in this body: the two eyes, two nostrils, two ears, one mouth,
one genital, one rectum. And there are ten kinds of internal air passing
within the body: priirw, apiina, udiina, vyiina, samiina, etc. The two birds
seated in this tree, as explained above, are the living entity and the localized
Supreme Personality of Godhead.
16 Kf§!la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
The root cause of the material manifestation described here is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. The Supreme Personality of Godhead
expands Himself and takes charge of the three qualities of the material
world. Vi  u takes charge of the modes of goodness, Brahma takes charge
of the modes of passion, and Lord Siva takes charge of the modes of
ignorance. Brahma, by the modes of passion, creates this manifestation,
Lord Vi  u maintains this manifestation by the modes of goodness, and
Lord Siva annihilates it by the modes of ignorance. The whole creation
ultimately rests in the Supreme Lord. He is the cause of creation, main
tenance and dissolution. And when the whole manifestation is dissolved, in
its subtle form as the energy of the Lord, it rests within the body of the
Supreme Lord.
"At the present," the demigods prayed, "the Supreme Lord Kr  a is
appearing just for the maintenance of this manifestation." Actually the
Supreme Cause is one, but, being deluded by the three modes of material
nature, less intelligent persons see that the material world is manifested
through different causes. Those who are intelligent can see that the cause
is one, Kr  a. As it is stated in the Brahma-sariihitii: sarva-kiirmya-kiirm:wm.
Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the cause of all causes.
Brahma is the deputed agent for creation, Vi  u is the expansion of Kr  a
for maintenance, and Lord Siva is the expansion of Kr  a for dissolution.
"Our dear Lord," the demigods prayed, "it is very difficult to under
stand Your eternal form of personality. People in general are unable to
understand Your actual form; therefore Y u are personally descending to
exhibit Your original eternal form. Somehow people can understand the
different incarnations of Your Lordship, but they are puzzled to under
stand the eternal form of Kr  a with two hands, moving among human
beings exactly like. one of them. This eternal form of Your Lordship is
ever increasing in transcendental pleasure for the devotees. But for the
nondevotees, this form is very dangerous." As stated in the Bhagavad-gitii,
Kr  a is very pleasing to the siidhu. It is said, paritrii[Liiya siidhuniim. But
this form is very dangerous for the demons because Kr  a also descends to
kill the demons. He is, therefore, simultaneously pleasing to the devotees
and dangerous to the demons.
"Our dear lotus-eyed Lord, You are the source of pure goodness. There
are many great sages who simply by samiidhi, or transcendentally medi
tating upon Your lotus feet and thus being absorbed in Your thought, have
easily transformed the great ocean of nescience created by the material na
ture to no more than water in a calf's hoof print." The purpose of medita
tion is to focus the mind upon the Personality of Godhead, beginning from
Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Kr  a in the Womb 1 7
His lotus feet. Simply b y meditation o n the lotus feet o f the Lord, great
sages cross over this vast ocean of material existence without difficulty.
" 0 self-illuminated one, the great saintly persons who ha':e crossed over
the ocean of nescience, by the help of the transcendental boat of Your
lotus feet, have not taken away that boat. It is still lying on this side." The
demigods are using a nice simile. If one takes a boat to cross over a river ,
the boat also goes with one to the other side of the river. And so when
one reaches the destination, how can the same boat be available to those
who are still on the other side? To answer this difficulty, the demigods
say in their prayer that the boat is not taken away. The devotees still
remaining on the other side are able to pass over the ocean of material
nature because the pure devotees do not take the boat with them when
they cross over. When one simply approaches the boat , the whole ocean of
material nescience is reduced to the size of water in a calf's hoofprint.
Therefore, the devotees do not need to take a boat to the other side ; they
simply cross the ocean immediately. Because the great saintly persons are
compassionate toward all conditioned souls, the boat is still lying at the
lotus feet of the Lord. One can meditate upon His feet at any time, and by
so doing, one can cross over the great ocean of material existence.
Meditation means concentration upon the lotus feet of the Lord. Lotus
feet indicate the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those who are im
personalists do not recognize the lotus feet of the Lord, and therefore
their obj ect of meditation is something impersonal. The demigods express
their mature verdict that persons who are interested in meditating on
something void or impersonal cannot cross over the ocean of nescience.
Such persons are simply imagining that they have become liberated. "0
lotus-eyed Lord ! Their intelligence is contaminated because they fail to
meditate upon the lotus feet of Your Lordship ." As a result of this
neglectful activity, the impersonalists fall down again into the material
way of conditioned life, although they may temporarily rise up to the
point of impersonal realization. lmpersonalists, after undergoing severe
austerities and penances, merge themselves into the Brahman effulgence
or impersonal Brahman existence. But their minds are not free from ma
terial contamination ; they have simply tried to negate the material ways of
thinking. That does not mean that they have become liberated. Thus they
fall down. In the Bhagavad-gitii it is stated that the impersonalist has to
undergo great tribulation in realizing the ultimate goal. At the beginning
of the Srimad-Bhiigavatam, it is also stated that without devotional service
to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one cannot achieve liberation
from the bondage of fruitive activities. The statement of Lord Kr§ a is
18 Kr tJ.a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
there in the Bhagavad-gitii, and in the Srimad-Bhiigavatam the statement
of the great sage Narada is there, and here also the demigods confirm it.
"Persons who have not taken to devotional service are understood to have
come short of the ultimate purpose of knowledge and are not favored by
Your grace." The impersonalists simply think that they are liberated, but
actually they have no feeling for the Personality of Godhead. They think
that when KH a comes into the material world, he accepts a material
body. They therefore overlook the transcendental body of Kr  a. This is
also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gitii. Avajiinanti miirit mu hii[t. In spite of
conquering material lust and rising up to the point of liberation, the im
personalists fall down. If they are engaged just in knowing things for the
sake of knowledge and do not take to the devotional service of the Lord,
they cannot achieve the desired result. Their achievement is the trouble
they take, and that is all. It is clearly stated in the Bhagavad-gitii that to
realize Brahman identification is not all. Brahman identification may help
one become joyful without material attachment or detachment and to
achieve the platform of equanimity, but after this stage, one has to take to
devotional service. When one takes to devotional service after being
elevated to the platform of Brahman realization, he is then admitted into
the spiritual kingdom for permanent residence in association with the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. That is the result of devotional service.
Those who are devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead never fall
down like the impersonalists. Even if the devotees fall down, they remain
affectionately attached to their Lordship. They can meet all kinds of
obstacles on the path of devotional service, and freely, without any fear,
they can surmount such obstacles. Because of their surrender, they are
certain that Kr  a will always protect them. As it is promised by Kr  a in
the Bhagavad-gitii: "My devotees are never vanquished."
"Our dear Lord, You have appeared in Your original unalloyed form,
the eternal form of goodness, for the welfare of all living entities within
this material world. Taking advantage of Your appearance, all of them
can now very easily understand the nature and form of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Persons who belong to the four divisions of the
social order (the brahmaciiris, the grhasthas, the viinaprasthas and the
sannyiisis) can all take advantage of Your appearance.
"Dear Lord, husband of the goddess of fortune, devotees who are
dovetailed in Your service do not fall down from their high position like
the impersonalists. Being protected by You, the devotees are able to
traverse over the heads of many of miiyii 's commanders-in-chief, who can
always put stumbling blocks on the path of liberation. My dear Lord, You
Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Kr§ a in the W omh 19
appear in Your transcendental form for the benefit of the living entities so
that they can see You face to face and offer their worshipful sacrifices by
ritualistic performance of the Vedas, mystic meditation and devotional
service as recommended in the scriptures. Dear Lord, if You did not appear
in Your eternal transcendental form, full of bliss and knowledge-which
can eradicate all kinds of speculative ignorance about Your position-then
all people would simply speculate about You according to their respective
modes of material nature."
The appearance of Kr  a is the answer to all imaginative iconography of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Everyone imagines the form of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead according to his mode of material nature.
In the Brahma-sarhhitii it is said that the Lord is the oldest person. There
fore a section of religionists imagine that God must he very old, and there
fore they depict a form of the Lord like a very old man. But in the same
Brahma-sarhhitii, that is contradicted; although He is the oldest of all
living entities, He has His eternal form as a fresh youth. The exact words
used in this connection in the Srimad-Bhiigavatam are vijiiiinam ajiiiinabhid
iipamiirjanam. Vijiiiinam means transcendental knowledge of the Supreme
Personality. Vijiiiinam is also experienced knowledge. Transcendental
knowledge has to he accepted by the descending process of disciplic
succession as Brahma presents the knowledge of Kr  a in the Brahma
sarhhitii. Brahma-sarhhitii is vijiiiinam as realized by Brahma's transcen
dental experience, and in that way he presented the form and the pastimes
of Kr  a in the transcendental abode. Ajiiiinabhid means that which can
match all kinds of speculation. In ignorance, people are imagining the
form of the Lord; sometimes He has no form and sometimes He has form,
according to their different imaginations. But the presentation of Kr  a in
the Brahma-sarhhitii is vijiiiinam-s, experienced knowledge given
by Lord Brahma and accepted by Lord Caitanya. There is no doubt about
it. Sri Kr  a's form, Sri Kr  a's flute, Kr  a's color-everything is reality.
Here it is said that this vijiiiinam is always defeating all kinds of speculative
knowledge. "Therefore, without Your appearing as Kr  a, as You are,
neither ajiiiinabhid (nescience of speculative knowledge) nor vijiiiinam
would he realized. Ajiiiinabhid iipamiirjanam-by Your appearance the
speculative knowledge of ignorance will he vanquished and the real
experienced knowledge of authorities like Lord Brahma will he established.
Men influenced by the three modes of material nature imagine their own
God according to the modes of material nature. In this way God is
presented in various ways, hut Your appearance will establish what the real
form of God is."
20 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
The highest blunder committed by the impersonalist is t  think that
when the incarnation of God comes, He accepts the form of matter
in the modes of goodness. Actually the form of Kr va or Narayava is
transcendental to any material idea. Even the greatest impersonalist,
Sari.karacarya, has admitted that niiriiya[ -a[t para 'vyak tiit: the material
creation is caused by the avyak ta impersonal manifestation of matter or
the nonphenomenal total reservation of matter, and Krwa is transcen
dental to that material conception. That is expressed in the Srimad
Bhii as suddha-sattva, or transcendental. He does not belong to the
material mode of goodness, and He is above the position of material
goodness. He belongs to the transcendental eternal status of bliss and
knowledge.
"Dear Lord, when You appear in Your different incarnations, You take
different names and forms according to different situations. Lord Kr va is
Your name because You are all attractive; You are called Syamasundara
because of Your transcendental beauty. Syiima means blackish, yet they
say that You are more beautiful than thousands of cupids. Kandarpa-koti
kamaniya. Although You appear in a color which is compared to the
blackish cloud, because You are transcendental Absolute, Your beauty is
many many times more attractive than the delicate body of Cupid.
Sometimes You are called Giridhari because You lifted the hill known as
Govardhana. You are sometimes called Nandanandana or Vasudeva or
Devakinandana because You appear as the son of Maharaj a Nanda or
Devaki or Vasudeva. Impersonalists think that Your many names or forms
are according to a particular type of work and quality because they accept
You from the position of a material observer.
"Our dear Lord, the way of understanding is not to study Your absolute
nature, form and activities by mental speculation. One must engage him
self in devotional service; then one can understand Your absolute nature,
transcendental form, name and quality. Actually only a person who has a
little taste for the service of Your lotus feet can understand Your transcen
dental nature or form and quality. Others may go on speculating for
millions of years, but it is not possible for them to understand even a single
part of Your actual position." In other words, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Kr va, cannot be understood by the nondevotees because
there is a curtain of Y ogamiiyii which covers Kr va 's actual features. As
confirmed in the Bhagavad-gitii, niiham prakiisa[t sarvasya. The Lord says,
"I am not exposed to anyone and everyone." When Kr va came, He was
actually present on the battlefield of Kuruk etra, and everyone saw Him.
But not everyone could understand that He was the Supreme Personality of
Prayers by the Demigods for Lord KH a in the Womb 21
Godhead. Still, everyone who died in His presence attained complete libera
tion from material bondage and was transferred to the spiritual world.
"0 Lord, the impersonalists or nondevotees cannot understand that
Your name is identical with Your form." Since the Lord is Absolute,
there is no difference between His name and His actual form. In the
material world there is a difference between form and name. The mango
fruit is different from the name of the mango. One cannot taste the mango
fruit simply by chanting, "Mango, mango, mango." But the devotee who
knows that there is no difference between the name and the form of the
Lord chants Hare KH a, Hare Kr  a, Kr  a Kr  a, Hare Hare, Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare, and realizes that he is always in
Kr  a's company.
For persons who are not very advanced in absolute knowledge of the
Supreme, Lord Kr  a exhibits His transcendental pastimes. They can
simply think of the pastimes of the Lord and get the full benefit. Since
there is no difference between the transcendental name and form of the
Lord, there is no difference between the transcendental pastimes and the
form of the Lord. For those who are less intelligent (like women,
laborers or the mercantile class), the great sage Vyasadeva wrote Mahii
bhiirata. In the Mahiibhiirata, Kr  a is present in His different activities.
Mahiibhiirata is history, and simply by studying, hearing and memorizing
the transcendental activities of Kr  a, the less intelligent can also gradually
rise to the standard of pure devotees.
The pure devotees, who are always absorbed in the thought of the tran
scendental lotus feet of Kr  a and who are always engaged in devotional
service in full Krsna consciousness, are never to be considered to be in the
material world.  ;I Riipa Gosvami has explained that those who are always
engaged in Kr  a consciousness, by body, mind and activities, are to be
considered liberated even within this body. This is also confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gitii: those who are engaged in the devotional service of the Lord
have already transcended the material position.
Kr  a appears to give a chance both to the devotees and nondevotees
for realization of the ultimate goal of life. The devotees get the direct
chance to see Him and worship Him. Those who are not on that platform
get the chance to become acquainted with His activities and thus become
elevated to the same position.
"0 dear Lord," the demigods continued, "You are unborn; therefore
we do not find any reason for Your appearance other than for Your
pleasurable pastimes." Although the reason for the appearance of the Lord
is stated in the Bhagavad-gitii (He descends just to give protection to the
22 K[ 1,1a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
devotee and vanquish the nondevotee), actually He descends for His
pleasure-meeting with the devotees, not really to vanquish the nondevo
tees. The nondevotees can be vanquished simply by material nature. "The
action and reaction of the external energy of material nature (creation,
maintenance and annihilation) are being carried on automatically. But
simply by taking shelter of Your holy name-because Your holy name and
Your personality are nondifferent-the devotees are sufficiently protected."
The protection of the devotees and the annihilation of the nondevotees
are actually not the business of the Supreme Personality of Godhead when
He descends. They are just for His transcendental pleasure. There cannot
be any other reason for His appearance.
"Our dear Lord, You are appearing as the best of the Yadu dynasty,
and we are offering our respectful humble obeisance unto Your lotus feet.
Before this appearance, You also appeared as the fish incarnation, the
horse incarnation, the tortoise incarnation, the swan incarnation, as King
Ramacandra, as Parasurama, and as many other incarnations. You ap
peared just to protect the devotees, and we request You in Your present
appearance as the Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself to give us
similar protection all over the three worlds and remove all obstacles for
the peaceful execution of our lives.
"Dear mother Devaki, within your womb is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, appearing along with all His plenary extensions. He is the
original Personality of Godhead appearing for our welfare. Therefore you
should not be afraid of your brother, the King of Bhoja. Your son Lord
Kr  a, who is the original Personality of Godhead, will appear for the
protection of the pious Yadu dynasty. The Lord is appearing not only
alone but accompanied by His immediate plenary portion, Balarama."
Devaki was very much afraid of her brother Kamsa because he had
already killed so many of her children. She used to remain very anxious
about Kr  a. In the Vi p,u Puriir:w it is stated that in order to pacify
Devaki, all the demigods, along with their wives, used to always visit her
to encourage her not to be afraid that her son would be killed by Kamsa.
Kr  a, who was within her womb, was to appear not only to diminish the
burden of the world but specifically to protect the interest of the Yadu
dynasty, and certainly to protect Devaki and Vasudeva.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Second Chapter of Kr  a,
"Prayers by the Demigods for Lord Kr ra in the Womb. "
3 I Birth of Lord Krsna• • •
As stated in the Bhagavad-gitii, the Lord says that His appearance, birth,
and activities are all transcendental, and one who understands them
factually becomes immediately eligible to be transferred to the spiritual
world. The Lord's appearance or birth is not like that of an ordinary man
who is forced to accept a material body according to his past deeds. The
Lord's appearance is explained in the Second Chapter : He appears out of
His own sweet pleasure. When the time was mature for the appearance of
the Lord, the constellations became very auspicious. The astrological
influence of the star known as Rohi!ti was also predominant because this
star is considered to be very auspicious. Rohi!ti is under the direct super
vision of Brahma. According to the astrological conclusion, besides the
proper situation of the stars, there are auspicious and inauspicious mo
ments due to the different situations of the different planetary systems.
At the time of Kr !ta's birth, the planetary systems were automatically
adjusted so that everything became auspicious.
At that time, in all directions, east, west, south, north, everywhere,
there was an atmosphere of peace and prosperity. There were auspicious
stars visible in the sky, and on the surface in all towns and villages or
pasturing grounds and within the minds of everyone there were signs of
good fortune. The rivers were flowing full of waters, and lakes were
beautifully decorated with lotus flowers. The forests were full with
beautiful birds and peacocks. All the birds within the forests began to sing
with sweet voices, and the peacocks began to dance along with their
consorts. The wind blew very pleasantly, carrying the aroma of different
flowers, and the sensation of bodily touch was very pleasing. At home, the
briihmarws, who were accustomed to offer sacrifices in the fire, found
their homes very pleasant for offerings. Due to disturbances created by
the demoniac kings, the sacrificial .fire altar had been almost stopped in the
23
24 KH a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
houses of briihma[ -as, but now they could find the opportunity to start the
fire peacefully. Being forbidden to offer sacrifices, the briihma[ -aS were
very distressed in mind, intelligence and activities, but just on the point
of Kf l).a 's appearance, automatically their minds became full of joy
because they could hear loud vibrations in the sky of transcendental sounds
proclaiming the appearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The denizens of the Gandharva and Kitinara planets began to sing, and
the denizens of Siddhaloka and the planets of the Oiral).aS began to offer
prayers in the service of the Personality of Godhead. In the heavenly
planets, the angels along with their wives, accompanied by the Apsaras,
began to dance.
The great sages and the demigods, being pleased, began to shower
flowers. At the seashore, there was the sound of mild waves, and above the
sea there were clouds in the sky which began to thunder very pleasingly.
When things were adjusted like this, Lord Vi l).U, who is residing within
the heart of every living entity, appeared in the darkness of night as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead before Devaki, who also appeared as one
of the demigoddesses. The appearance of Lord Vi l).U at that time could
be compared with the full moon in the sky as it rises on the eastern hori
zon. The objection may be raised that, since Lord Kr -9a appeared on the
eighth day of the waning moon, there could be no rising of the full moon.
In answer to this it may be said that Lord Kr -9a appeared in the dynasty
which is in the hierarchy of the moon; therefore, although the moon was
incomplete on that night, because of the Lord's appearance in the dynasty
wherein the moon is himself the original person, the moon was in an
overjoyous condition, so by the grace of Kr -9a he could appear just as a
full moon.
In an astronomical treatise by the name Khamiinikya, the constellations
at the time of the appearance of Lord Krwa are very nicely described. It is
confirmed that the child born at that auspicious moment was the Supreme
Brahman or the Absolute Truth.
Vasudeva saw that wonderful child born as a baby with four hands,
holding conchshell, club, disc, and lotus flower, decorated with the mark
of Srivatsa, wearing the jeweled necklace of kaustubha stone, dressed in
yellow silk, appearing dazzling like a bright blackish cloud, wearing a
helmet bedecked with the vaidiirya stone, valuable bracelets, earrings and
similar other ornaments all over His body and an abundance of hair on
His head. Due to the extraordinary features of the child, Vasudeva was
struck with wonder. How could a newly born child be so decorated? He
could therefore understand that Lord . Kf l).a had now appeared, and he
"Dear mother Devaki, within your wom.b is the Supreme Personality of Godhead . . . "
(p. 22)
"Therefore I request You to conceal this fou r-armed form of Your Lordshi p which
holds the four symbols of Vi  m . . . " (p. 29)
Lord Krwa played on the lap of D evak1 just like an ordinary child. (p. 30)

The j oyous vibrations at Kr !la 's birth ceremony could be heard in all the pasturing grounds
and houses. (p. 38)

"Oh child, leave me, leave me ! " (p . 46)
The night was very dark, but Vasudeva could see everything just as in the sunlight.
(p. 30)
Birth of Lord Kr  a 25
became overpowered by the occasion. Vasudeva very humbly wondered
that although he was an ordinary living entity conditioned by material
nature and was externally imprisoned by Kamsa, the all-pervading Per
sonality of Godhead , Vi J)U or Kr  ta, was appearing as a child in his home,
ex;actly in His original position. No earthly child is born with four hands
decorated with ornaments and nice clothing, fully equipped with all the
signs of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Over and over again,
Vasudeva glanced at his child, and he considered how to celebrate this
auspicious moment : "Generally, when a male child is born," he thought ,
"people observe the occasion with jubilant celebrations, and in my home,
although I am imprisoned , the Supreme Personality of Godhead has taken
birth. How many millions of millions of times should I be prepared to
observe this auspicious ceremony ! "
When Vasudeva, who is also called Anakadundubhi, was looking at his
newborn baby, he was so happy that he wanted to give many thousands of
cows in charity to the briihmaras. According to the Vedic system, when
ever there is an auspicious ceremony in the k§atriya king's palace, the
king gives many things in charity. Cows decorated with golden ornaments
are delivered to the briihmar;ws and sages. Vasudeva wanted to perform a
charitable ceremony to celebrate Kf J)a's appearance, but because he was
shackled within the walls of Kamsa 's prison, this was not possible. Instead,
within his mind he gave thousands of cows to the briihmaras.
When Vasudeva was convinced that the newborn child was the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself, he bowed down with folded hafl.ds and
began to offer Him prayers. At that time Vasudeva was in the transcen
dental position , and he became completely free from all fear of Kamsa .
The newborn baby was also flashing His effulgence within the room in
which He appeared.
Vasudeva then began to offer his prayers. "My dear Lord , I can under
stand who Y ou are. Y ou are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the
Supersoul of all living entities and the Absolute Truth. You have appeared
in Y our own eternal form which is directly perceived by us. I understand
that because I am afraid of Kamsa, Y ou have appeared just to deliver me
from that fear. You do not belong to this material world ; You are the
same person who brings about the cosmic manifestation simply by glancing
over material nature. "
One may argue that the Supreme Personality o f Godhead , who creates
the whole cosmic manifestation simply by His glance, cannot come within
the womb of D evaki, the wife of Vasudeva. To eradicate this argument ,
Vasudeva said , "My dear Lord , it is not a very wonderful thing that You
26 Kr a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appear within the womb of Devaki because the creation was also made in
that way. You were lying in the Causal Ocean as Maha-Vi 9u, and by Your
breathing process, innumerable universes came into existence. Then You
entered into each of the universes as Garbhodakasayi Vi 9u. Then again
You expanded Yourself as K irodakasayi Vi 9u and entered into the
hearts of all living entities and entered even within the atoms. Therefore
Your entrance in the womb of Devaki is understandable in the same way.
You appear to have entered, but You are simultaneously all-pervading. We
can understand Your entrance and nonentrance from material examples.
The total material energy remains intact even after being divided into
sixteen elements. The material body is nothing but the combination of the
five gross elements-namely earth, water, fire, air and ether. Whenever there
is a material body, it appears that such elements are newly created,
but actually the elements are always existing outside of the body. Similarly,
although You appear as a child in the womb of Devaki, You are also
existing ·outside. You are always in Your abode, but still You can simul
taneously expand Yourself into millions of forms.
"One has to understand Your appearance with great intelligence because
the material energy is also emanating from You. You are the original
source of the material energy, just as the sun is the source of the sunshine.
The sunshine cannot cover the sun globe, nor can the material energy
being an emanation from You-cover You. You appear to be in the three
modes of material energy, but actually the three modes of material energy
cannot cover You. This is understood by the highly intellectual philos
ophers. In other words, although You appear to be within the material
energy, You are never covered by it."
We hear from the Vedic version that the Supreme Brahman exhibits His
effulgence, and therefore everything becomes illuminated. We can under
stand from Brahma-sarhhitii that the brahmajyoti, or the Brahman efful
gence, emanates from the body of the Supreme Lord. And from the
Brahman effulgence, all creation takes place. It is further stated in the
Bhagavad-g itii that the Lord is also the support of the Brahman effulgence.
Originally He is the root cause of everything. But persons who are less
intelligent think that when the Supreme Personality of Godhead comes
within this material world, He accepts the material qualities. Such conclu
sions are not very mature, but are made by the less intelligent.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is directly and indirectly existing
everywhere; He is outside this material creation, and He is also within it.
He is within this material creation not only as Garbhodakasayi Vi§9u; He
is also within the atom. Existence is due to His presence. Nothing can be
Birth of Lord Kf  a 27
separated from His existence. In the Vedic injunction we find that the
Supreme Soul or the root cause of everything has to be searched out
because nothing exists independent of the Supreme Soul. Therefore the
material manifestation is also a transformation of His potency. Both inert
matter and the living force-soul-are emanations from Him. Only the
foolish conclude that when the Supreme Lord appears He accepts the
conditions of matter. Even if He appears to have accepted the material
body, He is still not subjected to any material condition. Kr  a has there
fore appeared and defeated all imperfect conclusions about the appearance
and disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
'"My Lord, Your appearance, existence and disappearance are beyond
the influence of the material qualities. Because Your Lordship is the
controller of everything and the resting place of the Supreme Brahman,
there is nothing inconceivable or contradictory in You. As You have said,
material nature works under Your superintendence. It is just like govern
ment officers working under the orders of the chief executive. The
influence of subordinate activities cannot affect You. The Supreme
Brahman and all phenomena are existing within You, and all the activities
of material nature are controlled by Your Lordship.
"You are called suklam. Suklam or 'whiteness' is the symbolic represen
tation of the Absolute Truth because it is unaffected by the material
qualities. Lord Brahma is called rakta, or red, because Brahma represents
the qualities of passion for creation. Darkness is entrusted to Lord Siva
because he annihilates the cosmos. The creation, annihilation and main
tenance of this cosmic manifestation is conducted by Your potencies, yet
You are always unaffected by those qualities. As confirmed in the Vedas,
Harir hi nirgUJ;w[l. siik§iit: the Supreme Personality of Godhead is always
free from all material qualities. It is also said that the qualities of passion
and ignorance are nonexistent in the person of the Supreme Lord.
"My Lord, You are the supreme controller, the Personality of Godhead,
the supreme great, maintaining the order of this cosmic manifestation. And
in spite of Your being the supreme controller, You have so kindly appeared
in my home. The purpose of Your appearance is to kill the followers of the
demonic rulers of the world who are in the dress of royal princes but are
actually demons. I am sure that You will kill all of them and their
followers and soldiers.
"I understand that You have appeared to kill the uncivilized Kamsa and
his followers. But knowing that You were to appear to kill him and his fol
lowers, he has already killed so many of Your predecessors, elder brothers.
Now he is simply awaiting the news of Your birth. As soon as he hears about
28 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
it, he will immediately appear with all kinds of weapons to kill You . "
After this prayer of Vasudeva, D evaki, the mother o f Kf§l)a, offered her
prayers. She was very frightened because of her brother's atrocities. D evaki
said "My dear Lord, Your eternal forms, like Narayal)a, Lord Rama,
Se a, V araha, Nrsimha, Vamana, Baladeva, and millions of similar incarna
tions emanating from Vi l)U , are described in the Vedic literature as
original. You are original because all Your forms as incarnations are
outside of this material creation. Your form was existing before this cosmic
manifestation was created. Your forms are eternal and all-pervading. They
are self-effulgent, changeless and uncontaminated by the material qualities.
Such eternal forms are ever-cognizant and full of bliss ; they are situated
in transcendental goodness and are always engaged in different pastimes.
You are not limited to a particular form only ; all such transcendental
eternal forms are self-sufficient . I can understand that You are the
Supreme Lord Vi§l)U .
"After many millions of years, when Lord Brahma comes to the end of
his life, the annihilation of the cosmic manifestation takes place. At that
time the five elements-namely earth, water, fire, air and ether-enter into
the mahat-tattva. The mahat-tattva again enters, by the force of time, into
the nonmanifested total material energy ; the total material energy enters
into the energetic pradhiina, and the pradhiina enters into You . Therefore
after the annihilation of the whole cosmic manifestation, You alone
remain with Your transcendental name, form , quality and paraphernalia.
"My Lord , I offer my respectful obeisances unto You because You are
the director of the unmanifested total energy, and the ultimate reservoir
of the material nature. My Lord , the whole cosmic manifestation is under
the influence of time, beginning from the moment up to the duration of
the year. All act under Your di rection. You are the original director of
everything and the reservoir of all potent energies.
"Therefore my Lord , I request You to save me from the cruel hands of
the son of Ugrasena, Kamsa. I am praying to Your Lordship to please
rescue me from this fearful condition because You are always ready to
give protection to Your servitors. " The Lord has confirmed this statement
in the Bhagavad-git'ii by assuring Arjuna, "You may declare to the world ,
My devotee shall never be vanquished. "
While thus praying t o the Lord for rescue, mother D evaki expressed her
motherly affection : "I understand that this transcendental form is general
ly perceived in meditation by the great sages, but I am still afraid because
as soon as Kamsa understands that You have appeared , he might harm
You. So I request that for the time being You become invisible to our
Birth of Lord Kr tta 29
material eyes. " In other words, she requested the Lord to assume the form
of an ordinary child. "My only cause of fear from my brother Kamsa is due
to Your appearance. My Lord Madhusiidana, Kamsa may know that You
are already born. Therefore I request You to conceal this four-armed form
of Your Lordship which holds the four symbols of Vi ttu-namely the
conchshell, the disc , the club and the lotus flower. My dear Lord , at the
end of the annihilation of the cosmic manifestation, You put the whole
universe within Your abdomen ; still by Your unalloyed mercy You have
appeared in my womb . I am surprised that You imitate the activities of
ordinary human beings j ust to please Your devotee."
On hearing the prayers of Devaki, the Lord replied , "My dear mother,
in the millennium of Svayambhuva Manu , My father Vasudeva was living
as one of the Prajiipatis, and his name at that time was Sutapa, and you
were his wife named Prsni. At that time , when Lord Brahma was desiring
to increase the population, he requested you to generate offspring. You
controlled your senses and performed severe austerities. By practicing the
breathing exercise of the yoga system , both you and your husband could
tolerate all the influences of the material laws : the rainy season, the on
slaught of the wind , and the scorching heat of the sunshine. You also
executed all religious principles. In this way you were able to cleanse your
heart and control the influence of material law. In executing your aus
terity, you used to eat only the leaves of the trees which fell to the ground.
Then with steady mind and controlled sex drive, you worshiped Me,
desiring some wonderful benediction from Me. Both of you practiced
severe austerities for 1 2 ,000 years, by the calculation of the demigods.
During that time, your mind was always absorbed in Me. When you were
executing devotional service and always thinking of Me within your heart ,
I was very much pleased with you . 0 sinless mother, your heart is therefore
always pure. At that time also I appeared before you in this form just to
fulfill your desire , and I asked you to ask whatever you desired. At that
time you wished to have Me born as your son. Although you saw Me
personally, instead of asking for your complete liberation from the material
bondage, under the influence of My energy , you asked Me to become your
son."
In other words, the Lord selected His mother and father-namely Prsni
and Sutapa-specifically to appear in the material world. Whenever the
Lord comes as a human being, He must have someone as a mother and
father, so He selected Prsni and Sutapa perpetually as His mother and
father. And on account of this, both Prsni and Sutapa could not ask the
Lord for liberation. Liberation is not so important as the transcendental
30 Kr l)a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
loving service of the Lord. The Lord could have awarded Prsni and Sutapa
immediate liberation, but He preferred to keep them within this material
world for His different appearances, as will be explained in the following
verses. On receiving the benediction from the Lord to become His father
and mother, both Prsni and Sutapa returned from the activities of austerity
and lived as husband and wife in order to beget a child who was the
Supreme Lord Himself.
In due course of time Prsni became pregnant and gave birth to the child.
The Lord spoke to Devaki and Vasudeva: "At that time My name was
Prsnigarbha. In the next millennium also you took birth as Aditi and
Kasyapa, and I became your child of the name U pendra. At that time My
form was just like a dwarf, and for this reason I was known as Vamanadeva.
I gave you the benediction that I would take birth as your son three times.
The first time I was known as Prsnigarbha, born of Prsni and Sutapa, the
next birth I was U pendra born of Aditi and Kasyapa, and now for the
third time I am born as Kr  a from you, Devaki and Vasu?eva. I appeared
in this Viwu form just to convince you that I am the same Supreme
Personality of Godhead again taken birth. I could have appeared just like
an ordinary child, but in that way you would not believe that I, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, have taken birth in your womb. My dear
father and mother, you have therefore raised Me many times as your
child, with great affection and love, and I am therefore very pleased and
obliged to you. And I assure you that this time you shall go back to home,
back to Godhead, on account of your perfection in your mission. I know
you are very concerned about Me and afraid of Kamsa. Therefore I order
you to take me immediately to Gokula and replace Me with the daughter
who has just been born to y asoda."
Having spoken thus in the presence of His father and mother, the
Lord turned Himself into an ordinary child and remained silent.
Being ordered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vasudeva
attempted to take his son from the delivery room, and exactly at that
time, a daughter was born of Nanda and Y asoda. She was Yogamiiyii, the
internal potency of the Lord. By the influence of this internal potency,
Yogamiiyii, all the residents of Kamsa's palace, especially the doorkeepers,
were overwhelmed with deep sleep, and all the palace doors opened, al
though they were barred and shackled with iron chains. The night was
very dark, but as soon as Vasudeva took Kr  a on his lap and went out, he
could see everything just as in the sunlight.
In the Caitan_ya-caritamrta it is said that Kr  a is just like sunlight, and
wherever there is Kr  a, the illusory energy, which is compared to darkness,
Birth of Lord Krsna 31. . .
cannot remain. When Vasudeva was carrying Kr v.a, the darkness of the
night disappeared. All the prison doors automatically opened. At the
same time there was a thunder in the sky and severe rainfall. While
Vasudeva was carrying his son Kr v.a in the falling rain, .Lord Se a in the
s ape of a serpent spread his hood over the head of Vasudeva so that he
would not be hampered by the rainfall. Vasudeva came onto the bank of
the Yamuna and saw that the water of the Yamuna was roaring with waves
and that the whole span was full of foam. Still, in that furious feature, the
river gave passage to Vasudeva to cross, just as the great Indian Ocean gave
a path to Lord Rama when He was bridging over the gulf. In this way
Vasudeva crossed the River Yamuna. On the other side, he went to the place
of Nanda Maharaja situated in Gokula, where he saw that all the cowherd
men were fast asleep. He took the opportunity of silently entering into
the house of Yasoda, and without difficulty he replaced his son, taking
away the baby girl newly born in the house of Yasoda. Then, after entering
the house very silently and exchanging the boy with the girl, he again
returned to the prison of Kamsa and silently put the girl on the lap of
Devaki. He again clamped the shackles on himself so that Kamsa could
not recognize that so many things had happened.
Mother Yasoda understood that a child was born of her, but because
she was very tired from the labor of childbirth, she was fast asleep. When
she awoke, she could not remember whether she had given birth to a male
or female child.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Third Chapter of Krwa,
"Birth of Lord K[§{W. "
4 I Kamsa Begins His Persecutions
After Vasudeva adjusted all the doors and gates, the gatekeepers awoke
and heard the newborn child crying. Kamsa was waiting to hear the news
of the child's birth, and the gatekeepers immediately approached him and
informed him that the child was born. At that time, Kamsa got up from
his bed very quickly and exclaimed, " Now the cruel death of my life is
born ! " Kamsa became perplexed now that his death was approaching, and
his hair stood on end . Immediately he proceeded toward the place where
the child was born.
Devaki, on seeing her brother approaching, prayed in a very meek
attitude to Kamsa : " My dear brother, please do not kill this female child.
I promise that this child will be the wife of your son ; therefore don't kill
her . You are not to be killed by any female child. That was the omen. You
are to be killed by a male child, so please do not kill her. My dear brother,
you have killed so many of my children who were just born , shining as
the sun . That is not your fault . You have been advised by demoniac friends
to kill my children . But now I beg you to excuse this girl. Let her live as
my daughter."
Kamsa was so cruel that he did not listen to the beautiful prayers of his
sister Devaki. He forcibly grabbed the newborn child to rebuke his sister
and attempted to dash her on the stone mercilessly. This is a graphic
example of a cruel brother who could sacrifice all relationships for the
sake of personal gratification. But immediately the child slipped out of
his hands, went up in the sky and appeared with eight arms as the younger
sister of Vi§J!U . She was decorated with a nice dress and flower garlands
and ornaments ; in her eight hands she held a bow, lancet, arrows, bell,
conchshell, disc , club and shield .
Seeing the appearance of the child (who was actually the goddess
Durga), all the demigods from different planets like Siddhaloka, Cira'!a-
32
Kamsa Begins His Persecutions 33
loka, Gandharvaloka, Apsaraloka, Kinnaraloka, and Uragaloka presented
her articles and began to offer their respective prayers. From above, the
goddess addressed Kamsa: "You rascal, how can you kill me? The child
who will kill you is already born before me somewhere within this world.
Don't be so cruel to your poor sister." After this appearance, the goddess
Durga became known by various names in various parts of the world.
After hearing these words, Kamsa became very much overwhelmed with
fear. Ou of pity, he immediately released Vasudeva and Devaki from the
bondage of their shackles and very politely began to address them. He said,
"My dear sister and brother-in-law, ! have acted just like a demon in killing
my own nephews. I have given up all consideration of our intimate rela
tionship. I do not know what will be the result of these acts of mine.
Probably I shall be sent to the hell where killers of the briihmaT}aS go. I am
surprised, however, that the celestial prophecy has not come true. False
propaganda is not found only in the human society. Now it appears that
even the celestial denizens speak lies. Because I believed in the words of
the celestial denizens, I have committed so many sins by killing the chil
dren of my sister. My dear Vasudeva and Devaki, you are both very great
souls. I have nothing to instruct you, but still I request that you not be
sorry for the death of your children. Every one of us is under the control
of superior power, and that superior power does not allow us to remain
together. We are bound to be separated from our friends and relatives in
due course of time. But we must know for certain that even after the
disappearance of the different material bodies, the soul remains intact
eternally. For example, there are many pots made of earthly clay, and they
are prepared and also broken. But in spite of this, the earth remains as it is
perpetually. Similarly, the bodies of the soul under different conditions
are made and destroyed, but the spirit soul remains eternally. So there is
nothing to lament over. Everyone should understand that this material
body is different from the spirit soul, and so long as one does not come to
that understanding, he is sure to accept the processes of transmigration
from one body to another. My dear -sister Devaki, you are so gentle and
kind. Please excuse me-don't be aggrieved by the death of your children,
which I have caused. Actually this was not done by me because all these
are predestined activities. One has to act according to the predestined
plan, even unwillingly. People misunderstand that with the end of the
body, the self dies, or they think that one can kill another living entity. All
these misconceptions oblige one to accept the conditions of material
existence. In other words, as long as one is not firmly convinced of the eter
nality of the soul, one is subjected to the tribulation of being killer and
34 Kr J)a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
killed. My dear sister D and brother-in-law Vasudeva, kindly excuse the
atrocities I have committed against you. I am very poor-hearted, and you
are so great-hearted, so take compassion upon me and excuse me."
While Kamsa was speaking to his brother-in-law and sister, tears flowed
from his eyes and he fell down at their feet. Believing the words of D urga
devi, whom he had tried to kill, Kamsa immediately released his brother
in-law and sister. He personally unlocked the iron shackles and very sym
pathetically showed his friendship, just like a family member.
When D evaki saw her brother so repentent, she also became pacified
and forgot all his atrocious activities against her children. Vasudeva also,
forgetting all past incidents, spoke smilingly with his brother-in-law.
Vasudeva told Kamsa, "My dear fortunate brother-in-law, what you are
saying about the material body and the soul is correct. Every living entity
is born ignorant, understanding this material body to be his self. This
conception of life is due to ignorance, and on the basis of this ignorance
we create enmity or friendship . Lamentation, jubilation, fearfulness, envy,
greed, illusion and madness are different features of our material concept
of life. A person influenced like this engages in enmity due only to the
material body. Being engaged in such activities, we forget our eternal
relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead."
Vasudeva took the opportunity of Kam sa's benevolence and informed
him that his atheistic activities were also due to this misconception of life
-namely taking the material body to be the self. When Vasudeva talked
with Kamsa in such an illuminating way, Kamsa became very pleased, and
his guilt for killing his nephews subdued. With the permission of his sister
D evaki and brother-in-law Vasudeva, he returned to his home with a
relieved mind.
But the next day Kamsa called all his counsellors together and narrated
to them all the incidents that had happened the night before. All the
counsellors of Kamsa were demons and eternal enemies of the demigods, so
they became depressed upon hearing their master speak of the night's
events. And although they were not very much experienced or learned,
they began to give instructions to Kamsa as follows: "Dear sir, let us now
make arrangements to kill all children who were born within the last ten
days in all towns, countries, villages and pasturing grounds. Let us execute
this plan indiscriminately. We think that the demigods cannot do anything
against us if we perform these atrocities. They are always afraid of fighting
with us, and even if they wish to check our activities, they will not dare to
do so. Because of the immeasurable strength of your bow, they fear you.
Indeed, we have practical experience that whenever you stood to fight
Karilsa Begins His Persecutions 35
with them and began to shower your arrows on them, they immediately
began to flee in all directions just to save their lives. Many of the demigods
were unable to fight with you, and they immediately surrendered them
selves unto you by opening their turbans and the flag on their heads. With
folded hands they begged you to spare them and said, 'My lord, we are all
afraid of your strength. Please release us from this dangerous fight.' We
have also seen many times that you would never kill such surrendered
fighters when they were all fearful, their bows, arrows and chari ts
broken, forgetful of their military activities and unable to fight with you.
So actually we have nothing to fear from these demigods. They are very
proud of being great fighters in peacetime outside of the warfield, but
actually they cannot show any talent or military power on the warfield.
Although Lord Vi  u, Lord Siva and Lord Brahma are always ready to
help the demigods headed by Indra, we have no reason to be afraid of
them. As far as Lord Vi  u is concerned, He has already hidden Himself
within the hearts of all living entities, and He cannot come out. As far as
Lord Siva is concerned, he has renounced all activities; he has already
entered into the forest. And Lord Brahma is always engaged in different
types of austerities and meditation. And what to speak of Indra-he is a
straw in comparison to your strength. Therefore we have nothing to fear
from all these demigods. But we must not neglect them because the demi
gods are our determined enemies. We must be careful to protect ourselves.
To root them out from their very existence, we should just engage our
selves in your service and be always ready for your command."
The demons continued to say: "If there is some disease in the body
which is neglected, it becomes incurable. Similarly, when one is not care
ful about restraining the senses and lets them loose, it is very difficult to
control them at all. Therefore, we must always be very careful of the
demigods before they get too strong to be subdued. The foundation of
strength of the demigods is Lord Vi  u, because the ultimate goal of all
religious principles is to satisfy Him. The Vedic injunctions, the briihmarws,
the cows, austerities, sacrifices, performances of charity and distribution
of wealth are all for the satisfaction of Lord Vi  u. So let us immediately
begin by killing all the briihma[tas who are in charge of the Vedic know
ledge and the great sages who are in charge of sacrificial ritualistic per
formances. Let us kill all the cows which are the source of butter which is
so necessary for performing sacrifices. Please give us your permission to
kill all these creatures."
Actually the limbs of the transcendental body of Lord Vi  u are the
briihmm;ws, the cows, Vedic knowledge, austerity, truthfulness, sense and
36 Kf l)a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
mind control, faithfulness, charity, tolerance and performance of sacri
fices. Lord Vi  u is situated in everyone's heart and is the leader of all
demigods, including Lord Siva and Lord Brahma. "We think that to kill
Lord Vi  u is to persecute the great sages and brahmarws, " said the
ministers.
Thus being advised by the demonic ministers, Kamsa, who was from the
very beginning the greatest rascal, decided to persecute the briihmarws · and
Vai  avas, being entrapped by the shackles of all-devouring, eternal time.
He ordered the demons to harass all kinds of saintly persons, and then he
entered his house. The adherents of Kamsa were all influenced by the
modes of passion as well as illusioned by the modes of ignorance, and
their only business was to create enmity with saintly persons. Such
activities can only reduce the duration of life. The demons accelerated the
process and invited their deaths as soon as possible. The result of per
secuting saintly persons is not only untimely death. The act is so offensive
that the actor also gradually loses his beauty, his fame and his religious
principles, and his promotion to higher planets is also checked. Driven by
various kinds of mental concoctions, the demons diminish all kinds of
welfare. An offense at the lotus feet of the devotees and briihmaras is a
greater offense than that committed at the lotus feet of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Thus a godless civilization becomes the source of
all calamities.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Fourth Chapter of Kr§ a,
"Karhsa Begins His Persecutions. "
Although Kr  a was the real son of Vasudeva and D evaki, because of
Kamsa 's atrocious activities Vasudeva could not enj oy the birth ceremony
of his son. But Nand a Maharaja, the foster father, celebrated the birth
ceremony of Kr  a very j oyfully. The next day, it was declared that a male
child was born of Yasoda. According to Vedic custom, Nanda Maharaj a
called for learned astrologers and briihmm:ws to perform the birth cere
mony. After the birth of a child, the astrologers calculate the moment of
the birth and make a horoscope of the child 's future life. Another cere
mony takes place after the birth of the child : the family members take
baths, cleanse themselves and decorate themselves with ornaments and
garlands ; then they come before the child and the astrologer to hear of the
future life of the child. Nanda Maharaj a and other memb.ers of the family
dressed and sat down in front of the birth place. All the briihmarws who
were assembled there on this occasion chanted auspicious mantras, ac
cording to the rituals, while the astrologers performed the birth ceremony.
All the demigods are also worshiped on this occasion, as well as the fore
fathers of the family . Nanda Maharaj a distributed 200 ,000 well decorated,
dressed and ornamented cows to the briihmaras. He not only gave cows in
charity, but hills of grains, decorated with golden-bordered garments and
many ornaments.
In the material world we possess riches and wealth in many ways, but
sometimes not in very honest and pious ways, because that is the nature of
accumulating wealth. According to Vedic injunction, therefore , such wealth
should be purified by giving cows and gold in charity to the briihmaras. A
newborn child is also purified by giving grains in charity to the briihmaras.
In this material world it is to be understood that we are always living in a
contaminated state. We therefore have to purify the duration of our lives,
our possession of wealth and ourselves. The duration of life is purified by
3 7
38 Kf !la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
taking daily b ath and cleansing the body inside and outside and accepting
the ten kinds of purificatory processes. By austerities, by worship of the
Lord, and by distribution of charity, we can purify the possession of
wealth. We can purify ourselves by studying the Vedas, by striving for
self-realization and by understanding the Supreme Absolute Truth. It is
therefore stated in the Vedic literature that by birth everyone is born a
siidra, and by accepting the purificatory process one becomes twice-born.
By studies of the Vedas one can become vipra, which is the preliminary
qualification for becoming a brahmm;w. When one understands the Abso
lute Truth in perfection, he is called a brahmarw. And when the brahma[l-a
reaches further perfection, he becomes a Vai l)-ava or a devotee.
In that ceremony, all the brahma[l-aS assembled began to chant different
kinds of Vedic mantras to invoke all good fortune for the child. There are
different kinds of chanting known as siita, miigadha, vandi, and viru
davali. Along with this chanting of mantras and songs, bugles and kettle
drums sounded outside the house. On this occasion, the joyous vibrations
could be heard in all the pasturing grounds and all the houses. Within and
outside of the houses there were varieties of artistic paintings, done with
rice pulp, and scented water was sprinkled everywhere, even on the roads
and streets. Ceilings and roofs were decorated with different kinds of flags,
festoons and green leaves. The gates were made of green leaves and flowers.
All the cows, bulls and calves were smeared with a mixture of oil and
turmeric and painted with minerals like red oxide, yellow clay and man
ganese. They wore garlands of peacock feathers, and were covered with nice
colored dresses and gold necklaces.
When all the ecstatic cowherd men heard that Nanda Maharaja, father of
Kr l)-a, was celebrating the b irth ceremony of his son, they became spon
taneously joyful. They dressed themselves with very costly garments and
ornamented their bodies with different kinds of earrings and necklaces and
wore great turbans on their heads. After dressing themselves in this gor
geous way, they took various kinds of presentations and thus approached
the house of Nanda Maharaja.
As soon as they heard that mother Yasoda had given birth to a child, all
the cowherd women became overwhelmed with joy, and they also dressed
themselves with various kinds of costly garments and ornaments and
smeared scented cosmetics on their bodies.
As the dust on the lotus flower exhibits the exquisite beauty of the
flower, all the gop s (cowherd girls) applied the dust of kunkuma on their
lotus-like faces. These beautiful gopis took their different presentations
and very soon reached the house of Maharaja Nanda. Overburdened with
Meeting of Nanda and Vasudeva 39
their heavy hips and swollen breasts, the gopis could not proceed very
quickly towards the house of Nanda Maharaja, but out of ecstatic love for
Kr  a they began to proceed as quickly as possible. Their ears were deco
rated with pearl rings, their necks were decorated with jewel padlocks,
their lips and eyes were decorated with different kinds of lipstick and
ointment, and their hands were decorated with nice golden bangles. As
they were very hastily passing over the stone road, the flower garlands
which were decorating their bodies fell to the ground, and it appeared that
a shower of flowers was falling from the sky. From the movement of the
different kinds of ornaments on their bodies, they were looking still more
beautiful. In this way, they all reached the house of N anda-Yasoda and
blessed the child: "D ear child, You live long just to protect us." While
they were blessing child Kr  a in this way, they offered a mixture of
turmeric powder with oil, yogurt, milk and water. They not only sprinkled
this mixture on the body of child Kr  a but on all other persons who were
present there. Also on that auspicious occasion, there were different bands
of expert musicians playing.
When the cowherd men saw the pastimes of the cowherd women, they
became very joyful, and in response they also began to throw yogurt,
milk, clarified butter and water upon the bodies of the gopis. Then both
parties began to throw butter on each other's bodies. Nanda Maharaja was
also very happy to see the pastimes of the cowherd men and women, and
he became very liberal in giving charity to the different singers who were
assembled there. Some singers were reciting great verses from the Upani$ads
and Puriirws, some were glorifying the family ancestors, and some were
singing very sweet songs. There were also many learned briihmaftaS present,
and Nanda Maharaja, being very satisfied on this occasion, began to give
them different kinds of garments, ornaments, and cows in charity.
It is very important to note in this connection how wealthy the inhabi
tants of Vrndavana were simply by raising cows. All the cowherd men
belonged to the vaisya community, and their business was to protect the
cows and cultivate crops. By their dress and ornaments and by their be
havior, it appears that although they were in a small village, they still were
rich in material possessions. They possessed such an abundance of various
kinds of milk products that they were throwing butter lavishly on each
other's bodies without restriction. Their wealth was in milk, yogurt,
clarified butter and many other milk products, and by trading their agri
cultural products, they were rich in various kinds of jewelry, ornaments
and costly dresses. Not only did they possess all these things, but they
could give them away in charity, as did Nanda Maharaja.
40 KH a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Thus Nanda Maharaja, the foster father of Lord Kn a, began to
satisfy the desires of all the men assembled there. He respectively received
them and gave them in charity whatever they desired. The learned
briihmar-as, who had no other source of income, were completely
dependent of the vaisya and k§atriya communities for their maintenance,
and they received gifts on such festive occasions as birthdays, marriages,
etc. While Nanda Maharaja was worshiping Lord Vi  u on this occasion
and was trying to satisfy all the people there, his only desire was that the
newborn child Kn a would be happy. Nanda Maharaja had no knowledge
that this child was the origin of Viwu, but he was praying to Lord Vi  u
to protect Him.
Rohi 1idevi, mother of Balarama, was the most fortunate wife of
Vasudeva. She. was away from her husband, yet just to congratulate
Maharaja Nanda on the occasion of the birth ceremony of his son, Kr pa,
she dressed herself very nicely. Wearing a garland, a necklace and other
bodily ornaments, she appeared on the scene and moved hither and
thither. According to the Vedic system, a woman whose husband is not at
home does not dress herself very nicely. But although Rohi i's husband
was away, she still dressed herself on this occasion.
From the opulence of the birth ceremony of Kn ta, it is very clear that
at that time Vrndavana was rich in every respect. Because Lord Kr  a took
birth in the house of King Nanda and mother Yasoda, the goddess of
fortune was obliged to manifest her opulences in Vrndavana. It appeared
that Vrndavana had already become a site for the pastimes of the goddess
of fortune.
After the birth ceremony, Nanda Maharaja decided to go to Mathura to
pay the annual tax to the government of Kamsa. Before leaving, he called
for the able cowherd men of the village and asked them to take care of
Vrndavana in his absence. When Nanda Maharaja arrived in Mathura,
Vasudeva got the news and was very eager to congratulate his friend. He
immediately went to the place where Nanda Maharaja was staying. When
Vasudeva saw Nanda, he felt that he had regained his life. Nanda, over
whelmed with joy, immediately stood up and embraced Vasudeva.
Vasudeva was received very warmly and offered a nice place to sit. At
that time Vasudeva was anxious about his two sons who had been put
under the protection of Nanda without Nanda's knowledge. With great
anxiety, Vasudeva inquired about them. Both Balarama and Krwa were
the sons of Vasudeva. Balarama was transferred to the womb of Rohi 1i,
Vasudeva's own wife,, but Rohi i was kept under the protection of Nanda
Maharaja. Kr  a was personally delivered to Yasoda and exchanged with
Meeting of Nanda and Vasudeva 41
her daughter. Nanda Maharaja knew that Balarama was the son of
Vasudeva, although he did not know that Krwa was also Vasudeva's son.
But Vasudeva was aware of this fact and inquired very eagerly about Kr§ a
and Balarama.
Vasudeva then addressed him, "My dear brother, you were old enough
and very anxious to beget a son, and yet you had none. Now by the grace
of the Lord you are fortunate to have a very nice son. I think that this
incident is very auspicious for you. Dear friend, I was imprisoned by
Kamsa, and now I am released; therefore this is another birth for me. I had
no hope of seeing you again, but by God's grace I can see you." Vasudeva
then expressed his anxiety about Kr§ a. Kr§ a was sent incognito to the
bed of mother Yasoda, and after very pompously celebrating His birth
ceremony, Nanda went to Mathura. So Vasudeva was very pleased and said,
"This is a new birth for me." He never expected that Kr§ a would live
because all his other sons were killed by Kamsa. .
Vasudeva continued, "My dear friend, it is very difficult for us to live
together. Although we have our family and relatives, sons and daughters,
by nature's way we are generally separated from one another. The reason
for this is that every living entity appears on this earth under different
pressures of fruitivc: activities; although they assemble together, there is no
certainty of their remaining together for a long time. According to one's
fruitive activities, one has to act differently and thereby be separated. For
example, many plants and creepers are floating on the waves of the ocean.
Sometimes they come together and sometimes they separate forever: one
plant goes one way and another plant goes another. Similarly, our family
assembly may be very nice while we are living together, but after some
time, in the course of the waves of time, we are separated."
The purport of this expression by Vasudeva is this: although he had
eight sons born in the womb of Devaki, unfortunately they were all gone.
He could not even keep his one son Kr§ a with him. Vasudeva was feeling
His separation, but he could not express the real fact. "Please tell me about
the welfare of Vrndavana," he said. "You have many animals-are they
happy? Are they getting sufficient grass and water? Please also let me know
whether the place where you are now living is undisturbed and peaceful."
This inquiry was made by Vasudeva because he was very anxious about
Kr§ a's safety. He knew that Kamsa and his followers were trying to kill
Kr§!la by sending various kinds of demons. They had already resolved
that all children born within ten days of the birthday of Kr§ a should be
killed. Because Vasudeva was so anxious about Kr§!la, he inquired about
the safety of His residence. He also inquired about Balarama and His
42 Kr !la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
mother Rohi9-i, who were entrusted to the care of Nanda Maharaja.
Vasudeva also reminded N anda Maharaja that Balarama did not know His
real father. "He knows you as His father. And now you have another child,
Kr 9-a, and I think you are taking very nice care for both of Them. " It is
also significant that Vasudeva inquired about the welfare of Nanda
Maharaja's animals. The animals, and especially the cows, were protected
exactly in the manner of one's children. Vasudeva was a k§atriya, and
Nanda Maharaj a was a vaiSya. It is the duty of the k§atriya to give protec
tion to the citizens of mankind, and it is the duty of the vaisyas to give
protection to the cows. The cows are as important as the citizens. Just as
the human citizens should be given all kinds of protection, so the cows
also should be given full protection.
Vasudeva continued to say that the maintenance of religious principles,
economic development and the satisfactory execution of meeting the
demands of the senses depend on cooperation among relatives, nations and
all humanity. Therefore, it is everyone's duty to see that his fellow citizens
and the cows are not put into difficulty. One should see to the peace and
comfort of his fellow man and the animals. The development of religious
principles, economic development and sense gratification can then be
achieved without difficulty. Vasudeva expressed his. sorrow due to not
being able to give protection to his own sons born of Devaki. He was
thinking that religious principles, economic development and the satisfac
tion of his senses were therefore all lost.
On hearing this, Nanda Maharaja replied, "My dear Vasudeva, I know
that you are very much aggrieved because the cruel king Kamsa has killed all
your sons born of Devaki. Although the last child was a daughter, Kamsa
could not kill her, and she has entered into the celestial planets. My dear
friend, do not be aggrieved; we are all being controlled by our past unseen
activities. Everyone is subjected to his past deeds, and one who is conver
sant with the philosophy of karma and its reaction is a man in knowledge.
Such a person will not be aggrieved at any incident, happy or miserable."
Vasudeva then replied, "My dear Nanda, if you have already paid the
government taxes, then return soon to your place, because I think that
there may be some disturbances in Gokula."
After the friendly conversation between Nanda Maharaja and Vasudeva,
Vasudeva returned to his home. The cowherd men headed by Nanda
Maharaja, who had come to Mathura to pay their taxes, also returned.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Fifth Chapter of Krwa,
"Meeting of Nanda and Vasudeva. "
6 I Piitana Killed
While Nanda Maharaja was returning home , he considered Vasudeva's
warning that there might be some disturbance in Gokula. Certainly the
advice was friendly and not false. So Nanda thought, "There is some truth
in it. " Therefore, out of fear, he began to take shelter of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. It is quite natural for a devotee in danger to think
of Kr  a because he has no other shelter. When a child is in danger, he takes
shelter of his mother or father. Similarly, a devotee is always under the
shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, but when he specifically
sees some danger, he remembers the Lord very rapidly.
After consulting with his demonic ministers, Kamsa instructed a witch
named Piitana, who knew the black art of killing small children by ghastly
sinful methods, to kill all kinds .. of children in the cities, villages and
pasturing grounds. Such witches can play their black art only where there
is no chanting or hearing of the holy name of Kr  a. lt is said that wherever
the chanting of the holy name of Kr  a is done, even negligently, all bad
elements-witches, ghosts, and dangerous calamaties-immediately dis
appear. And this is certainly true of the place where the chanting of the
holy name of Kr pa is done seriously-especially in Vrndavana when the
Supreme Lord was personally present. Therefore, the doubts of Nanda
Maharaja were certainly based on affection for Kr pa. Actually there was
no danger from the activities of Piltana, despite her powers. Such witches
are called khecari, which means they can fly in the sky. This black art of
witchcraft is still practiced by some women in the remote northwestern
side of India. They can transfer themselves from one place to another on
the branch of an uprooted tree. Piitana knew this witchcraft, and therefore
she is described in the Bhiigavatam as khecari.
Putana entered the county of Gokula, the residential quarter of N anda
Maharaja, without permission. Dressing herself just like a beautiful woman,
43
44 .Kr !J.a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
she entered the house of mother Yasoda. She appeared very beautiful with
raised hips, nicely swollen breasts, earrings, and flowers in her hair. She
looked especially beautiful on account of her thin waist. She was glancing
at everyone with very attractive looks and smiling face, and all the residents
of Vrndavana were captivated. The innocent cowherd women thought that
she was a goddess of fortune appearing in Vrndavana with a lotus flower in
her hand. It seemed to them that she had personally come to see Kr  a,
who is her husband. Because of her exquisite beauty, no one checked her
movement, and therefore she freely entered the house of Nanda Maharaja.
Piitana, the killer of many, many children, found baby Kr  a lying on a
small bed, and she could at once perceive that the baby was hiding His
unparalleled potencies. Piitana thought, "This child is so powerful that He
can destroy the whole universe immediately."
Piitana's understanding is very significant. The Supreme Personality of
Godhead, Kr  a, is situated in everyone's heart. It is stated in the
Bhagavad-gita that He gives one necessary intelligence, and He also causes
one to forget. Piitana was immediately aware that the child whom she was
observing in the house of Nanda Maharaja was the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Himself. He was lying there as a small baby, but that does not
mean that He was less powerful. The materialistic theory that God-worship
is anthropomorphic is not correct. No living being can become God by
undergoing meditation or austerities. God is always God. Kr  la as the
child-baby is as complete as He is as a full-fledged youth. The Mayavadi
theory holds that the living entity was formerly God but has now become
overwhelmed by the influence of maya. Therefore they say that presently
he is not God, but when the influence of maya is taken away, then he
again becomes God. This theory cannot be applied to the minute living
entities. The living entities are minute parts and parcels of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; they are minute particles or sparks of the supreme
fire, but are not the original fire, or Kr  a. Kr  a is the Supreme Person
ality of Godhead, even from the beginning of His appearance in the house
of Vasudeva and Devaki.
Kr  a showed the nature of a small baby and closed His eyes, as if to
avoid the face of Piitana. This closing of the eyes is interpreted and studied
in different ways by the devotees. Some say that Kr  a closed His eyes
because He did not like to see the face of Piitana, who had killed so many
children and who had now come to kill Him. Others say that something
extraordinary was being dictated to her, and in order to give her assurance,
Kr  a closed His eyes so that she would not be frightened. And yet others
interpret in this way: Kr !la appeared to kill the demons and give protec-
Piitana Killed 45
tion to the devotees, as it is stated in the Bhagavad-gitii: paritrii[liiya
siidhiiniirh viniisiiya ca du krtiim. The first demon to be killed was a
woman. According to Vedic rules, the killing of a woman, a briihmara,
cows, or of a child, is forbidden. Kr tta was obliged to kill the demon
Piitana, and because the killing of a woman is forbidden according to Vedic
Sastra, He could not help but close His eyes. Another interpretation is
that Kr tta closed His eyes because He simply took Piitana to be His
nurse. Putana came to Kr tta just to offer her breast for the Lord to suck.
Kr tta is so merciful that even though He knew Putana was there to kill
Him, He took her as His nurse or mother.
There are seven kinds of mothers according to Vedic injunction: the
real mother, the wife of a teacher or spiritual master, the wife of a king,
the wife of a briihmarw, the cow, the nurse, and the mother earth. Because
Putana came to take Kr tta on her lap and offer her breast's milk to be
sucked by Him, she was accepted by Kr tta as one of His mothers. That is
considered to be another reason He closed His eyes: He had to kill a nurse
or mother. But His killing of His mother or nurse was no different from
His love for His real mother or foster mother Yasoda. We further under
stand from Vedic information that Putana was also treated as a mother and
given the same facility as Yasoda. As Yasoda was given liberation from the
material world, so Putana was also given liberation. When the baby Kr tta
closed His eyes, Putana took Him on her lap. She did not know that she
was holding death personified. If a person mistakes a snake for a rope, he
dies. Similarly, Putana killed so many babies before meeting Kr tta, but
now she was accepting the snake that would kill her immediately.
When Putana was taking baby Kr tta on her lap, both Yasoda and Rohitti
were present, but they did not forbid her because she was so beautifully
dressed and because she showed motherly affection towards Kr tta. They
could not understand that she was a sword within a decorated case. Putana
had smeared a very powerful poison on her breasts, and immediately after
taking the baby on her lap, she pushed her breastly nipple within His
mouth. She was hoping that as soon as He would suck her breast, He would
die. But baby Kr tta very quickly took the nipple in anger. He sucked the
milk-poison along with the life air of the demon. In other words, Kr tta
simultaneously sucked the milk from her breast and killed her by sucking
out her life. Kr tta is so merciful that because the demon Piitana came to
offer her breast-milk to Him, He fulfilled her desire and accepted her
activity as motherly. But to stop her from further nefarious activities, He
immediately killed her. And because the demon was killed by Kr tta, she
got liberation. When Kr tta sucked out her very breath, Putana fell down
46 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
on the ground, spread her arms and legs and began to cry, "Oh child, leave
me, leave me! " She was crying loudly and perspiring, and her whole body
became wet.
As she died, screaming, there was a tremendous vibration both on the
earth and in the sky, in all directions, and people thought that thunderbolts
were falling. Thus the nightmare of the Piitana witch was over, and she
assumed her real feature as a great demon. She opened her fierce mouth
and spread her arms and legs all over. She fell exactly as Vrtrasura when
struck by the thunderbolt of Indra. The long hair on her head was scattered
all over her body. Her fallen body extended up to twelve miles and smashed
all the trees to pieces, and everyone was struck with wonder upon seeing
this gigantic body. Her teeth appeared just like ploughed roads, and her
nostrils appeared just like mountain caves. Her breasts appeared like small
hills, and her hair was a vast reddish bush. Her eye sockets appeared like
blind wells, and her two thighs appeared like two banks of a river; her two
hands appeared like two strongly constructed bridges, and her abdomen
seemed like a dried-up lake. All the cowherd men and women became
struck with awe and wonder upon seeing this. And the tumultuous sound
of her falling shocked their brains and ears and made their hearts beat
strongly.
When the gopis saw little Kr  a fearlessly playing on Piitana's lap, they
very quickly came and picked Him up. Mother Yasoda, Rohi i, and other
elderly gopis immediately performed the auspicious rituals by taking the
tail of a cow and circumambulating His body. The child was completely
washed with the urine of a cow, and the dust created by the hooves of the
cows was thrown all over His body. This was all just to save little Kr  a
from future inauspicious accidents. This incident gives us a clear indication
of how important the cow is to the family, society and to living beings in
general. The transcendental body of Kr  a did not require any protection,
but to instruct us on the importance of the cow, the Lord was smeared
over with cow dung, washed with the urine of a cow, and sprinkled with
the ,dust upraised by the walking of the cows.
After this purificatory process, the gopis, headed by mother Yasoda and
Rohi i, chanted twelve names of Vi  u to give Kr  a's body full protection
from all evil influences. They washed their hands and feet and sipped water
three times, as is the custom before chanting mantra. They chanted as
follows: "My dear Kr  a, may the Lord who is known as Ma iman protect
Your thighs; may Lord Vi  u who is known as Yajfia protect Your legs;
may Lord Acyuta protect Your arms; may Lord Hayagriva protect Your
abdomen; may Lord Kesava protect Your heart; may Lord Vi  u protect
Piitana Killed 47
Your arms; may Lord U rukrama protect Your face; may Lord Isvara
protect Your head; may Lord Cakradhara protect Your front; may Lord
Gadadhara protect Your back; may Lord Madhusiidana who carries a bow
in His hand protect Your eyesight; may Lord Vi§!IU with His conchshell
protect Your left side; may the Personality of Godhead Upendra protect
You from above, and may Lord Tark§ya protect You from below the earth;
may Lord Haladhara protect You from all sides; may the Personality of
Godhead known as Hr§lkesa protect all Your senses; may Lord Naraya!la
protect Your breath; and may the Lord of Svetadvipa, Naraya!la, protect
Your heart; may Lord Yogesvara protect Your mind; may Lord Pfsnigarbha
protect Your intelligence, and may the Supreme Personality of Godhead
protect Your soul. While You are playing, may Lord Govinda protect You
from all sides, and when You are sleeping, may Lord Madhava protect You
from all danger; when You are working may the Lord of Vaiku!ltha
protect You from falling down; when You are sitting, may the Lord of
Vaiku!ltha give You all protection; and while You are eating, may the
Lord of all sacrifices give You all protection."
Thus mother Yasoda began to chant different names of Vi§!IU to protect
the child Kr§!!a's different bodily parts. Mother Yasoda was firmly con
vinced that she should protect her child from different kinds of evil spirits
and ghosts-namely I)akinis, Yatudhanis, Kii§ma!IQ.as, Yak§as, Rak§asas,
Vinayakas, Kotara, Revati, Jye§tha, Piitana, Matrkas, U nmadas and simi
lar other evil spirits who cause persons to forget their own existence
and give trouble to the life-air and the senses. Sometimes they appear in
dreams and cause much perturbation; sometimes they appear as old
women and suck the blood of small children. But all such ghosts and evil
spirits cannot remain where there is chanting of the holy name of God.
Mother Yasoda was firmly convinced of the Vedic injunctions about the
importance of cows and the holy name of Vi§!IU; therefore she took all
shelter in the cows and the name of Vi§!IU just to protect her child Kr§pa.
She recited all the holy names of Vi§!IU so that He might save the child.
Vedic culture has taken advantage of keeping cows and chanting the holy
name of Vi§!IU since the beginning of history, and persons who are still
following the Vedic ways, especially the householders, keep at least one
dozen cows and worship the D eity of Lord Vi§!IU, who is installed in their
house.
The elderly gopis of Vrndavana were so absorbed in affection for Kr§!la
that they wanted to save Him, although there was no need to, for He had
already protected Himself. They could not understand that Kr§!la was the
Supreme Personality of Godhead playing as a child. After performing the
48 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
formalities to protect the child, mother Yasoda took Kr I;J.a and let Him
suck her own breast. When the child was protected by Vi I;J.U mantra,
mother Y asoda felt that He was safe. In the meantime, all the cowherd
men who went to Mathura to pay tax returned home and were struck with
wonder at seeing the gigantic dead body of Putana.
Nanda Maharaja recalled the prophecy of Vasudeva and considered him
a great sage and mystic yogi; otherwise, how could he have foretold an
incident that happened during his absence from Vrndavana. After this, all
the residents of Vraja cut the gigantic body of Putana into pieces and
piled it up with wood for burning. When all the limbs of Putana's body
were b urning, the smoke emanating from the fire created a good aroma.
This aroma was due to her being killed b y Kr I;J.a. This means that the
demon Putana was washed of all her sinful activities and attained a celestial
body. Here is an example of how the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
all good: Putana came to kill Kr I;J.a, but because He sucked her milk, she
was immediately purified, and her dead body attained a transcendental
quality. Her only b usiness was to kill small children; she was only fond of
blood. But in spite of being envious of Kr I;J.a, she attained salvation
because she gave her milk to Him to drink. So what can be said of others
who are affectionate to Kr va in the relationship of mother or father?
The pure devotees always serve Kr I;J.a with great love and affection, for
He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul of every living
entity. It is concluded therefore that even a little energy expended in the
service of the Lord gives one immense transcendental profit. This is ex
plained in the Bhagavad-gitii: svalpam apy asya dharmasya. Devotional ser
vice in Krsna consciousness is so sublime that even a little service to Krsna,. . . . . .
knowingly or unknowingly, gives one the greatest benefit. The system of
worshiping Kr I;J.a by offering flowers from a tree is also beneficial for the
living entity who is confined to the bodily existence of that tree. When
flowers and fruits are offered to Kr I;J.a, the tree that bore them also
receives much benefit, indirectly. The arcana process, or worshiping
procedure, is therefore beneficial for everyone. Kr I;J.a is worshipable by
great demigods like Brahma and Lord Siva, and Putana was so fortunate
that the same Kr I;Ia played in her lap as a little child. The lotus feet of
Kr va, which are worshiped by great sages and devotees, were placed on
the body of Putana. People worship Kr va and offer food, but auto
matically He sucked the milk from the body of Putana. Devotees therefore
pray that if simply by offering something as an enemy, PUtana got so
much benefit, then who can measure the benefit of worshiping Kr !la in
love and affection?
Piitana Killed 49
One should only worship Kr va if for no other reason than so much
benefit awaits the worshiper. Although Piitana was an evil spirit, she gained
elevation just like the mother of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. It is
clear that the cows and the elderly gopis who offered milk to Kr pa were
also elevated to the transcendental position. Kr va can· offer anyone any
thing, from liberation to anything materially conceivable. Therefore, there
cannot be any doubt of the salvation of Piitana, whose bodily milk was
sucked by Kr va for such a long time. And how can there be any doubt
about the salvation of the gopis who were so fond of Kr va? Undoubtedly
all the gopis and cowherd boys and cows who served Kr va in Vrndavana
with love and affection were liberated from the miserable condition of
material existence.
When all the inhabitants of Vrndavana smelled the good aroma from the
smoke of the burning Putana, they inquired from each other, "Where is
this good flavor coming from?" And while conversing, they came to
understand that it was the fumes of the burning Putana. They were very
fond of Kr va, and as soon as they heard that the demon Putana was killed
by Kr va, they offered blessings to the little child out of affection. After
the burning of Putana, Nanda Maharaja came home and immediately took
up the child on his lap and began to smell His head. In this way, he was
quite satisfied that his little child was saved from this great calamity. Srila
Sukadeva Gosvami has blessed all persons who hear the narration of the
killing of Piitana by Kr va. They will surely attain the favor of Govinda.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Sixth Chapter of Kr va,
"Pii ta nii Killed. "
7 I Salvation of Trnavarta• •
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kr :p.a, is always full of six
opulences-namely complete wealth, complete strength, complete fame,
complete knowledge, complete beauty and complete renunciation. The
Lord appears in different complete, eternal forms of incarnation. The
conditioned soul has immense opportunity to hear about the transcenden
tal activities of the Lord in these different incarnations. In the Bhagavad
gitii it is said, janma karma ca me divyam. The pastimes and activities of
the Lord are not material ; they are beyond the material conception. But
the conditioned soul can benefit by hearing such uncommon activities.
Hearing is an opportunity to associate with the Lord ; to hear His activities
is to evolve to the transcendental nature-simply by hearing. The con
ditioned soul has a natural aptitude to hear something about other
conditioned souls in the form of fiction, drama and novel. That inclination
to hear something about others may be utilized in hearing the pastimes of
the Lord. Then one can immediately evolve to his transcendental nature.
Kr :p.a 's pastimes are not only beautiful; they are also very pleasing to the
mind.
If someone takes advantage of hearing the pastimes of the Lord, the
material contamination of dust, accumulated in the heart due to long
association with material nature, can be immediately cleansed. Lord
Caitanya also instructed that simply by hearing the transcendental name
of Lord Kr :p.a, one can cleanse the heart of all material contamination .
There are different processes for self-realization, but this process of
devotional service-of which hearing is the most important function-when
adopted by any conditioned soul, will automatically cleanse him of the
material contamination and enable him to realize his real constitutional
position. Conditional life is due to this contamination only, and as soon as
it is cleared off, then naturally the dormant function of the living entity
rendering service to the Lord-awakens. By developing his eternal relation-
50
Salvation of Tntavarta 5 1
ship with the Supreme Lord, one becomes eligible t o create friendship
with the devotees. Maharaj a Parik it recommended, from practical ex
perience, that everyone try to hear about the transcendental pastimes of
the Lord. This KrHw treatise is meant for that purpose , and the reader
may take advantage in order to attain the ultimate goal of human life.
The Lord , out of His causeless mercy, descends on this material world
and displays His activities just like an ordinary man. Unfortunately the
impious entities or the atheistic class of men consider Kr l).a to be an
ordinary man like themselves, and so they deride Him. This is condemned
in the Bhagavad-gitii by the Lord Himself when He says, ''A vajiinanti miim
miit},hii . " The milt},has, or the rascals, take Kf l).a to be an ordinary man or
a slightly more powerful man ; out of their great misfortune, they cannot
accept Him as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sometimes such
unfortunate persons misrepresent themselves as incarnations of Kf§l).a
without referring to the authorized scriptures.
When Kf§l).a grew up a little more, He began to turn Himself backside
up ; He did not merely lie down on His back. And another function was
observed by Y a soda and Nand a Maharaja : Kr t;la's first birthday. They
arranged for Kf l).a 's birthday ceremony, which is still observed by all
followers of the Vedic principles. (Kr l).a's birthday ceremony is observed
in India by all Hindus, irrespective of different sectarian views.) All the
cowherd men and women were invited to participate , and they arrived in
jubilation. A nice band played , and the people assembled enj oyed it. All
the learned briihmarws were invited, and they chanted Vedic hymns for
the good fortune of Kr l).a. During the chanting of the Vedic hymns and
playing of the bands, Kr t;la was bathed by mother Y asoda. This bathing
ceremony is technically called abhi§eka, and even today this is observed in
all the temples of Vrndavana as Janma§tami D ay or the birthday anniver
sary of Lord Kr l).a.
On this occasion, mother Y asoda arranged to distribute a large quantity
of grains, and first-class cows decorated with golden ornaments were made
ready to be given in charity to the learned, respectable briihmarws. Yasoda
took her bath and dressed herself nicely, and taking child Kr l).a, duly
dressed and bathed, on her lap , she sat down to hear the Vedic hymns
chanted by the briihmm;ws. While listening to the chanting of the Vedic
hymns, the child appeared to be falling asleep , and therefore mother
Y asoda very silently laid Him down on the bed. Being engaged in receiving
all the friends, relatives and residents of Vrndavana on that holy occasion,
she forgot to feed the child milk. He was crying, being hungry, but mother
Y asoda could not hear Him cry because of the various noises. The child,
52 :l<r :.;ta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
however, became angry because He was hungry and His mother was not
paying attention to Him. So He lifted His legs and began to kick His lotus
feet just like an ordinary child. Baby Kr va had been placed underneath a
hand-driven cart, and while He was kicking His legs, He accidently touched
the wheel of the cart, and it collapsed. Various kinds of utensils and brass
and metal dishes had been piled up in the hand cart, and they all fell down
with a great noise. The wheel of the cart separated from the axle, and the
spokes of the wheel were all broken and scattered hither and thither.
Mother Yasoda and all the gopis, as well as Maharaja Nanda and the
cowherd men, were astonished as to how the cart could have collapsed by
itself. All the men and women who were assembled for the holy function
crowded around and began to suggest how the cart might have collapsed.
No one could ascertain the cause, but some small children who were
entrusted to play with baby· Kr va informed the crowd that it was due to
Kr va 's striking His feet against the wheel. They assured the crowd that
they had seen how it happened with their own eyes, and they strongly
asserted the point. Some were listening to the statement of the small
children, but others said, "How can you believe the statements of these
children?" The cowherd men and women could not understand that the
all-powerful Personality of Godhead was lying there as a baby, and
He could do anything. Both the possible and impossible were in His
power. While the discussion was going on, baby Kr va cried. Without
remonstration, mother Yasoda picked the child up on her lap and called
the learned briihmarws to chant holy Vedic hymns to counteract the evil
spirits. At the same time she allowed the baby to suck her breast. If a
child sucks the mothees breast nicely, it is to be understood that he is out
of all danger. After this, all the stronger cowherd men put the broken cart
in order, and all the scattered things were set up nicely as before. The
briihmarws thereafter began to offer oblations to the sacrificial fire with
yogurt, butter, kusa grass, and water. They worshiped the Supreme Per
sonality of Godhead for the good fortune of the child.
The briihmar-as who were present at that time were all qualified because
they were not envious; they never indulged in untruthfulness, they were
never proud, they were nonviolent, and they never claimed any false
prestige. They were all bona fide briihmar-as, and there was no reason to
think that their blessing would be useless. With firm faith in the qualified
briihmar-as, Nanda Maharaja took his child on his lap and bathed Him with
water mixed with various herbs while the briihmar-as chanted hymns from
the .f(k, Yajus and Siima Vedas.
It is said that without being a qualified briihmap,a, one should not read
Salvation of Trnavarta 53
the mantras of the Vedas. Here is the proof that the briihmaras were
qualified with all the brahminical symptoms. Maharaja Nanda also had full
faith in them. Therefore they were allowed to perform the ritualistic
ceremonies by chanting the Vedic mantras. There are many different
varieties of sacrifices recommended for different purposes, but the mantras
are all to be chanted by qualified briihmaras. And because in this age of
Kali such qualified briihmaras are not available, all Vedic ritualistic
sacrifices are forbidden. Sri Caitanya Mahaprabhu has therefore recom
mended only one kind of sacrifice in this age-namely sankirtana yajiia, or
simply chanting the mahiimantra, Hare Kr  a, Hare Kr  a, Kr  a Kr  a,
Hare Hare, Hare Rama, Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
As the briihmaras chanted the Vedic hymns and performed the ritualistic
ceremonies for the second time, Nanda Maharaja again gave huge quantities
of grains and many cows to them. All the cows which were given in charity
were covered with nice gold- embroidered garments, and their horns were
bedecked with golden rings; the hooves were covered with silver plate, and
they wore garlands of flowers. He gave so many cows just for the welfare
of his wonderful child, and the briihmanas in return bestowed their heart
felt blessing. And the blessings offered by the able briihmaras were never
to be baffled.
One day, shortly after this ceremony, when mother Yasoda was patting
her baby on her lap, the baby felt too heavy, and being unable to carry
Him, she unwillingly placed Him on the ground. After a while, she became
engaged in household affairs. At that time, one of the servants of Kamsa,
known as Tr avarta, as instructed by Kamsa, appeared there in the shape
of a whirlwind. He picked the child up on his shoulders and raised a great
dust storm all over Vrndavana. Because of this, everyone's eyes became
covered within a few moments, and the whole area of Vrndavana became
densely dark so that no one could see himself or anyone else. During this
great catastrophe, mother Yasoda could not see her baby, who was taken
away by the whirlwind, and she began to cry very piteously. She fell down
on the ground exactly like a cow who has just lost her calf. When mother
Yasoda was so piteously crying, all the cowherd women immediately came
and began to look for the baby, but they were disappointed and could not
find Him. The Tr avarta demon who took baby Kr  a on his shoulder
went high in the sky, but the baby assumed such a weight that suddenly
he could not go any further, and he had to stop his whirlwind activities.
Baby Krwa made Himself heavy and began to weigh down the demon.
The Lord caught hold of his neck. Tr avarta felt the baby to be as heavy
as a big mountain, and he tried to get out of His clutches, but he was
54 Kf l)a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
unable to do so, and his eyes popped out from their sockets. Crying very
fiercely, he fell down to the ground of Vrndavana and died. The demon
fell exactly like Tripurasura, who was pierced by the arrow of Lord Siva.
He hit the stone ground, and His limbs were smashed. His body became
visible to all the inhabitants of Vrndavana ..
When the gopis saw the demon killed and child Kr l)a very happily
playing on his body, they immediately picked Kr l)a up with great affec
tion. The cowherd men and women became very happy to get back their
beloved child Kr l)a. At that time they began to talk about how wonderful
it was that the demon took away the child to devour Him but could not
do so; instead he fell down dead. Some of them supported the situation:
"This is proper because those who are too sinful die from their sinful
reactions, and child Kr l)a is pious; therefore He is saved from all kinds of
fearful situations. And we too must have performed great sacrifices in our
previous lives, worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, giving
great wealth in charity and acting philanthropically for the general welfare
of men. Because of such pious activities, the child is saved from all
danger."
The gopis assembled there spoke among themselves: "What sort of
austerities and penances we must have undergone in our previous lives!
We must have worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, offered
different kinds of sacrifices, made charities and performed many welfare
activities for the public such as growing banyan trees and excavating wells.
As a result of these pious activities, we have got back our child, even
though He was supposed to be dead. Now He has come back to enliven
His relatives." After observing such wonderful happenings, Nanda Maharaja
began to think of the words of Vasudeva again and again.
After this incident, when Yasoda once was nursing her child and patting
Him with great affection, there streamed a profuse supply of milk from
her breast, and when she opened the mouth of the child with her fingers,
she suddenly saw the universal manifestation within His mouth. She saw
within the mouth of Kr r1a the whole sky, including the luminaries, stars
in all directions, the sun, moon, fire, air, seas, islands, mountains, rivers,
forests, and all other movable and immovable entities. U pon seeing this,
mother Yasoda's heart began to throb, and she murmured within herself,
"How wonderful this is! " She could not express anything, but simply
closed her eyes. She was absorbed in wonderful thoughts. Kr Q-a 's showing
the universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, even when
lying down on the lap of His mother, proves that the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is always the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whether He is
Salvation of Trl)avarta 55
manifested as a child on the lap of His mother or as a charioteer on the
battlefield of Kuruk etra. The concoction of the impersonalist, that one
can become God by meditation or by some artificial material activities,
is herewith declared false. God is always God in any condition or status,
and the living entities are always the parts and parcels of the Supreme
Lord. They can never be equal to the inconceivable s pernatural power
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Seventh Chapter ofKf pa,
"Salvation of TJTI-O.varta. ,
8 I Vision of the Universal Form
After this incident, Vasudeva asked his family priest Gargamuni to visit
the place of Nanda Maharaja in order to astrologically calculate the future
life of Kr  a. Gargamuni was a great saintly sage who underwent many
austerities and penances and was appointed priest of the Y adu dynasti
When Gargamuni arrived at the home of Nanda Maharaja, Nanda Maharaj a
was very pleased to see him and immediately stood up with folded hands
and offered his respectful obeisances. He received Gargamuni with the
feeling of one who is worshiping God or the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. He offered him a nice sitting place, and when he sat down,
Nanda Maharaj a offered him a warm reception. Addressing him very
politely, he said : " My dear briihma ;ta, your appearance in a householder's
place is only to enlighten. We are always engaged in household duties and
are forgetting our real duty of self-realization. Your coming to our house
is to give us some enlightenment about spiritual life. You have no other
purpose to visit householders. " Actually a saintly person or a briihmar-a has
no business visiting householders who are always busy in the matter of
dollars and cents. If it is asked, "Why don't the householders go to a saintly
person or a briihma ;w for enlightenment ? " the answer is that householders
are very poor-hearted. Generally householders think that their engagement
in family affairs is their prime duty and that · self-realization or enlighten
ment in spiritual knowledge is secondary. Out of compassion only, saintly
persons and briihmar-as go to householders' homes.
Nanda Maharaja addressed Gargamuni as one of the great authorities
in astrological science. The foretellings of astrological science, such
as the occurrence of solar or lunar eclipses , are wonderful calcula
tions, and by this particular science, a person can understand the
future very clearly . Gargamuni was proficient in this knowledge. By
this knowledge one can understand w hat his previous activities were,
5 6
Vasudeva silently entered the house and exchanged his son for the girl. (p. 3 1 )

No one could ascertain the cause of the cart's falling. (p . 52)

Tr avarta felt the baby to be as heavy as a mountain. (p. 53)

Mother Y asoda saw within the mouth of Kr pa the whole sky , inclu ding all the luminaries ,
stars and all directions . ( p . 54 )
"All day They simply make arrangements to steal our butter and yogurt." (p. 6 1 )
Vision of the Universal Form 57
and by the result of such activities one may enjoy or suffer in this life.
Nanda Maharaja also addressed Gargamuni as the "best of the brah
marws. " A brahmar-a is one who is expert in the knowledge of the Supreme.
Without knowledge of the Supreme Absolute, one cannot be recognized as
a b rahmar-a. The exact word' used in this connection is brahmavidam,
which means those who know the Supreme very well. An expert
brahmar-a is able to give reformatory facilities to the sub-castes-namely
the k§atriyas and vaisyas. The sudras observe no reformatory performances.
The b riihmar-a is considered to be the spiritual master or priest for the
k§atriya and vaisya. Nanda Maharaj a happened to be a vaisya, and he
accepted Gargamuni as a first class briihmara. He therefore offered his two
foster sons-namely Krwa and Balarama-to Him to purify. He agreed that
not only these boys, but all human beings just after birth should accept a
qualified briihmar-a as spiritual master.
Upon this request, Gargamuni replied, "Vasudeva has sent me to see to
the reformatory performances of these boys, especially Krwa's. I am their
family priest, and incidentally, it appears to me that Kf§r;Ia is the son of
Devaki." By his astrological calculation, Gargamuni could understand that
Kf§I;!a was the son of Devaki but that He was being kept under the care of
Nand a Maharaja, which N anda did not know. Indirectly he said that Krwa,
as well as Balarama, were both sons of Vasudeva. Balarama was known as
the son of Vasudeva because His mother Rohi 1i was present there, but
Nanda Maharaja did not know about Kr§!la. Gargamuni indirectly disclosed
the fact that Krwa was the son' of Devaki. Gargamuni also warned Nanda
Maharaj a that if he would perform the reformatory ceremony, then Kam sa,
who was naturally very sinful, would understand that Kf§r;Ia was the son
of Devaki and -Vasudeva. According to astrological calculation, Devaki
could not have a female child, although everyone thought that the eighth
child of Devaki was female. In this way Gargamuni intimated to Nanda
Maharaj a that the female child was born of Yasoda and that Kr§!la was
born of Devaki, and they were exchanged. The female child, or -Durga,
also informed Kamsa that the child who would kill him was already born
somewhere else. Gargamuni stated, "If I give your child a name and if He
fulfills the prophecy of the female child to Kamsa, then it may be that the
sinful demon will come and kill this child also after the name-giving
ceremony. But I do not want to become responsible for all these future
calami Lies."
On hearing the words of G argamuni, Nanda Maharaja said, "If there is
such danger, then it is better not to plan any gorgeous name-giving cere·
mony. It would be better for you Lo simply chant the V edi c hymns and
58 l(r J).a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
perform the purificatory process. We belong to the twice-born caste, and I
am taking this opportunity of your presence. So please perform the name
giving ceremony without external pomp." Nanda Maharaja wanted to
keep the name giving ceremony a secret and yet take advantage of
Gargamuni's performing the ceremony.
When Gargamuni was so eagerly requested by Nanda Maharaja, he
performed the name-giving ceremony as secretly as possible in the cowshed
of Nanda Maharaja. He· informed Nanda Maharaja that Balarama, the son
of Rohil)-1, would be very pleasing to his family members and relatives and
therefore would be called Rama. In the future He would be extraordinarily
strong and therefore would be called Balaram.a. Gargamuni said further,
"Because your family and the family of the Y adus are so intimately con
nected and attracted, therefore His name will also be Sankar a!la." This
means that Gargamuni awarded three names to the son of Rohil)-1-namely
Balarama, Sankar aJ).a, and Baladeva. But he carefully did not disclose the
fact that Balarama also appeared in the womb of Devaki and was subse
quently transferred to the womb of Rohini. Kf J).a and Balarama are real
brothers, being originally sons of Devak1.
Gargamuni then informed Nanda Maharaja, "As far as the other boy is
concerned, this child has taken different bodily complexions in different
yugas (millennia). First of all He assumed the color white, then He assumed
the color red, then the color yellow and now He has assumed the color
black. Besides that, He was formerly the son of Vasudeva; therefore His
name should be Vasudeva as well as Krwa. Some people will call Him
Kr JJa, and some will call Him Vasudeva. But one thing you must know:
This son has had many, many other names and activities due to His
different pastimes."
Gargamuni gave Nanda Maharaja a further hint that his son will also be
called Giridhari because of His uncommon pastimes of lifting Goverdhana
Hill. Since he could understand everything past and future, he said, "I
know everything about His activities and name, but others do not know.
This child will be very pleasing to all the cowherd men and cows. Being
very popular in V rndavana, He will be the cause of all good fortune for
you. Because of His presence, you will overcome all kinds of material
calamities, despite opposing elements."
Gargamuni continued to say, "My dear King of V raja, in His previous
births, this child many times protected righteous persons from the hands of
rogues and thieves whenever there was political disruption. Your child is
so powerful that anyone who will become a devotee of your boy will never
be troubled by enemies. Just as demigods are always protected by Lord
Vision of the Univeral Form 59
Vi !lu , so the devotees of your child will always be protected by Naraya!la,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This child will grow in power,
beauty, opulence-in everything-on the level of Naraya!la, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Therefore I would advise that you protect Him
very carefully so that He may grow without disturbance."
Gargamuni further informed Nanda Maharaj a that because he was a
great devotee of Naraya!la, Lord Naraya!la gave a son who is equal to Him.
At the same time he indicated, "Your son will be disturbed by so many
demons, so be careful and protect Him." In this way, Gargamuni convinced
Nanda Maharaj a that Naraya!la Himself had become his son. In various
ways he described the transcendental qualities of his son. After giving this
information, Gargamuni returned to his home. Nanda Maharaj a began to
think of himself as the most fortunate person, and he was very satisfied to
be benedicted in this way.
A short time after this incident  both Balarama and Kr !la began to
crawl on Their hands and knees. When They were crawling like that, They
pleased Their mothers. The bells tied to Their waist and ankles sounded
fascinating, and They would move around very pleasingly. Sometimes,
just like ordinary children, They would be frightened by others and would
immediately hurry t o Their mothers for protection. Sometimes They
would fall into the clay and mud of V rndavana and would approach Their
mothers smeared with clay and saffron. They were actually smeared with
saffron and sandalwood pulp by Their mothers, but due to crawling over
muddy clay, They would simultaneously smear Their bodies with clay. As
soon as They would come crawling to their mothers, Y asoda and Rohi!li
would take Them on their laps and, covering the lower portion of their
saris, allow Them to suck their breasts. When the babies were sucking their
breasts, the mothers would see small teeth coming in. Thus their j oy would
be intensified to see their children grow. Sometimes the naughty babies
would crawl up to the cowshed, catch the tail of a calf and stand up. The
calves, being disturbed, would immediately begin running here and there,
and the children would be dragged over clay and cow dung. To see this
fun, Y asoda and Rohi!li would call all their neighboring friends, the go pis.
Upon seeing these childhood pastimes of Lord Kr !la, the go pis would be
merged in transcendental bliss. In their enj oyment they would laugh very
loudly.
Both Krwa and Balarama were so restless that Their mothers Y asoda
and Rohi!li would try to protect Them from cows, bulls, monkeys, water,
fire and birds while they were executing their household duties. Always
being anxious to protect the children and to execute their duties, they
60 Kr l).a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
were not very tranquil. In a very short time, both Kp;>pa and Balarama
began to stand u p and slightly move on Their legs. When Krwa and
Balarama began to walk, other friends of the same age joined Them, and
together they began to give the highest transcendental pleasure to the
gopis, specifically to mother Yasoda and Rohi':li.
All the gopi friends of Y asoda and Rohi':li enjoyed the naughty childish
activities of Kr pa and Balarama in Vrndavana. In order to enjoy further
transcendental bliss, they all assembled and went to mother Y asoda to
lodge complaints against the restless boys. When Kr ':la was sitting before
mother Yasoda, all the elderly gopis began to lodge complaints against
Him so that Kf ':la could hear. They said, "Dear Yasoda, why don't you
restrict your naughty Krwa. He comes to our houses along with Balarama
every morning and evening, and before the milking of the cows They let
loose the calves, and the calves drink all the milk of the cows. So when we
go to milk the cows, we find no milk, and we have to return with empty
pots. If we warn Krwa and Balarama about doing this, They simply smile
charmingly. We cannot do anything. Also, your Krwa and Balarama find
great pleasure in stealing our stock of yogurt and butter from wherever we
keep it. When Kr va and Balarama are caught stealing the yogurt and
butter, They say, 'Why do you charge us with stealing? Do you think that
butter and yogurt are in scarcity in our house?' Sometimes They steal
butter, yogurt and milk and distribute them to the monkeys. When the
monkeys are well fed and do not take any more, then your hoys chide,
'This milk and butter and yogurt are useless-even the monkeys won't take
it.' And They break the pots and throw them hither and thither. If we keep
our stock of yogurt, butter and milk in a solitary dark place, your Kr Fa
and Balarama find it in the darkness by the glaring effulgence of the
ornaments and jewels on Their bodies. If by chance they cannot find the
hidden butter and yogurt, They go to our little babies and pinch their
bodies so that they cry, and then They go away. If we keep our stock of
butter and yogurt high on the ceiling, hanging on a swing, although it is
beyond Their reach, They arrange to reach it by piling all kinds of wooden
crates over the grinding machine. And if They cannot reach, They make a
hole in the pot. We think therefore that you better take all the jeweled
ornaments from the bodies of your children. "
O n hearing this, Yasoda would say, "All right , I will take all the jewels
from Kr ':la so that He can not see the butter hidden in the darkness."
Then the gopis would say, "No, no , don't do this. What good will you do
by taking away the jewels? We do not know what kind of boys these are,
but even without ornaments They spread some kind of effulgence so that
Vision of the Universal Form 61
even in darkness They can see everything." Then mother Yasoda would
inform them, "All right, keep your butter and yogurt carefully so that
They may not reach it." In reply to this, the gopis said, "Yes, actually we
do so, but because we are sometimes engaged in our household duties,
these naughty boys enter our house somehow or other ·and spoil every
thing. Sometimes being unable to steal our butter and yogurt, out of
anger They pass urine on the clean floor and sometimes spit on it. Just
see your boy now-He is hearing this complaint. All day They simply make
arrangements to steal our butter and yogurt, and now They are sitting
just like very silent good boys. Just see His face." When mother Yasoda
thought to chastise her boy after hearing all the complaints, she saw His
pitiable face, and smiling, she did not chastise Him.
Another day, when Kr  la and Balarama were playing with Their friends,
all the boys joined Balarama and told mother Yasoda that Kr§ a had eaten
clay. On hearing this, mother Y asoda caught hold of Kr§ a's hand and said ,
"My dear Kr  a, why have You eaten earth in a solitary place? Just see, all
Your friends including Balarama are complaining about You." Being
afraid of His mother, Kr§ a replied, "My dear mother, all these boys,
including My elder brother Balarama, are speaking lies against Me. I have
never eaten clay. My elder brother Balarama, while playing with Me today,
became angry, and therefore He has joined with the other boys to complain
against Me. They have all combined together to complain so you will be
angry and chastise Me. If you think they are truthful, then you can look
within My mouth to see whether I have taken clay or not." His mother
replied, "All right, if You have actually not taken any clay, then just open
Your mouth. I shall see."
When the Su preme Personality of Godhead Kr pa was so ordered by His
mother, He immediately opened His mouth just like an ordinary boy. Then
mother Y asoda saw within that mouth the complete opulence of creation.
She saw the entire outer space in all directions, mountains, islands, oceans,
seas, planets, air, fire, moon and stars. Along with the moon and the stars
.she also saw the entire elements, water, sky, the extensive ethereal
existence along with the total ego and the products of the senses and the
controller of the senses, all the demigods, the objects of the senses like
sound, smell, etc., and the three qualities of material nature. She also
could perceive that within His mouth were all living entities, eternal time,
material nature, spiritual nature, activity, consciousness and different
forms of the whole creation. Y asoda could find within the mouth of her
child everything necessary for cosmic manifestation. She also saw, within
His mouth, herself taking Krsna on her lap and having Him sucking her
62 Kr J.la , the Supreme Personality of Godhead
breast . Upon seeing all this , she became struck with awe and began to
wonder whether she were dreaming or actually seeing something extra
ordinary. She concluded that she was either dreaming or seeing the
play of the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. She
thought that she had become mad , mentally deranged, to see all those
wonderful things. Then she thought , "It may be cosmic mystic power
attained by my child , and therefore I am perplexed by such visions within
His mouth. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme
Personality of Godhead under whose energy bodily self and bodily
possessions are conceived." She then said , " Let me offer my respectful
obeisances unto Him , under whose illusory energy I am thinking that
N anda Maharaja is my husband and Kr§!la is my son, that all the properties
of Nanda Maharaj a belong to me and that all the cowherd men and women
are my subjects. All this misconception is due to the illusory energy of the
Supreme L ord . So let me pray to Him that He may protect me always. "
While mother Y asoda was thinking in this high philosophical way, Lord
Kr§!la again expanded His internal energy just to bewilder her with maternal
affection. Immediately mother Y asoda forgot all philosophical speculation
and accepted Kr§ ta as her own child . She took Him on her lap and became
overwhelmed with maternal affection. She thus began to think , "Kr§ ta is
not understandable to the masses through the gross process of knowledge ,
but He can be received through the Upani§ads and the Vedanta or mystic
Yoga system and Sankhya philosophy." Then she began to think of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as her own begotten child .
Certainly mother Y asoda had executed many, many pious activities as a
result of which she got the Absolute Truth, Supreme- Personality of
Godhead , as her son who sucked milk from her breast . Similarly, Nanda
Maharaja also must have performed many great sacrifices and pious
activities for Lord Kr§ ta to become his son and address him as father.
But it is surprising that Vasudeva and D evaki did not enj oy the transcen
dental bliss of Kr§ ta 's childhood pastimes , although Kr§ ta was their real
son. The childhood pastimes of Kr§ la are glorified even today by many
sages and saintly persons, but Vasudeva and Devaki could not enj oy such
childhood pastimes personally. The reason for this was explained by
Sukadeva Gosvami to Maharaj a Parik§it as follows.
When the best of the V asus of the name Dropa along with his wife
Ohara were ordered to increase progeny by Lord Brahma, they said unto
him , " D ear father , we are seeking your benediction . " Dro ta and O hara
then took benediction from Brahma that in the future-when they would
take birth again within the universe-the Su preme Lord Kr§ a in His most
Vision of the Universal Form 63
attractive feature of childhood would absorb their whole attention. Their
dealings with Kr  a would be so powerful that simply by hearing of
K  a's childhood activities with them, anyone could very easily cross over
the nescience of birth and death. Lord Brahma agreed to give them the
benediction, and as a result the same Dro a appeared as Nanda Maharaja
in Vrndavana, and the same Dhara appeared as mother Yasoda, the wife of
Nanda Maharaja.
In this way, Nanda Maharaja and his wife , mother Yasoda, developed
their unalloyed devotion for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, having
gotten Him as their son. And all the gopis and cowherd men who were
associates of Kr  a naturally developed their own different feelings of
love for Krsna .. . .
Therefore, just to fulfill the benediction of Lord Brahma, Lord Kr rta
appeared along with His plenary expansion, Balarama, and performed
all kinds of childhood pastimes in order to increase the transcendental
pleasure of all residents of v rndavana.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Eighth Chapter of Kr  a,
"Vision of the Universal Form. "
9 I Mother Y asoda Binding Lord Kr  a
Once upon a time , seeing that her maidservant was engaged in different
household duties , mother Y asoda personally took charge of churning
butter. And while she churned butter, she sang the childhood pastimes of
Kr !la and enj o yed thinking of her son.
The end of her sari was tightly wrapped while she churned , and on
account of her intense love for her son , milk automatically dripped from
her breasts which moved as she labored very hard , churning with two
hands. The bangles and bracelets on her hands tinkled as they touched
each other , and her earrings and breasts shook. There were drops of
perspiration on her face , and the flower garland which was on her head
scattered here and there . Before this picturesque sight , Lord Kr !la
appeared as a child . He felt hungry, and out of love for His mother , He
wanted her to stop churning. He indicated that her first business was to let
Him suck her breast and then churn butter later .
Mother Y asoda took her son on her lap and pushed the nipples of her
breasts into His mouth. And while Kr !la was sucking the milk , she was
smiling, enj oying the beauty of her child's face . Suddenly, the milk which
was on the oven began to boil over. Just to stop the milk from spilling,
mother Y asoda at once put Kr !la aside and went to the oven . L eft in that
state by His mother , Kr !la became very angry, and His lips and eyes
became red in rage . He pressed His teeth and lips, and taking up a piece of
stone , He immediately broke the butter pot. He took butter out of it , and
with false tears in His eyes, He began to eat the butter in a secluded place .
In the meantime , mother Y asoda returned to the churning place after
setting the overflowing milk pan in order. She saw the broken pot in which
the churning yogurt was kept. Since she could not find her boy, she
concluded that the broken pot was His work. She began to smile as she
thought , "The child is very clever. After breaking the pot He has left this
64
Mother Y asoda Binding Lord Kf J)a 65
place , fearing punishment . " After she sought all over, she found a big
wooden grinding mortar which was kept upside down , and she found her
son sitting on it. He was taking butter which was hanging from the ceiling
on a swing, and He was feeding it to the monkeys. She saw Kr  a looking
this way and that way in fear of her because He was conscious of His
nau ghty behavior. After seeing her son so engaged, she very silently
approached Him from behind . Krwa , however, quickly saw her coming
at Him with a stick in her hand , and immediately He got down from the
grinding mortar and began to flee in fear.
Mother Y asoda chased Him to all corners, trying to capture the Supreme
Personality of Godhead who is never approached even by the meditations
of great yogis. In other words , the Supreme Personality of Godhead , Kr  a ,
who is never caught by the yogis and speculators, was playing just like a
little child for a great devotee like mother Y asoda . Mother Y asoda,
however, could not easily catch the fast-ru nning child because of her thin
waist and heavy body. Still she tried to follow Him as fas t as possible . Her
hair loosened , and the flower in her hair fell to the gro und. Although she
was tired, she somehow reached her naughty child and captured Him.
When He was caught , Krwa was almost on the point of crying. He smeared
His hands over His eyes , which were anointed with black eye cosmetics.
The child saw His mother's face while she stood over Him, and His eyes
became restless from fear . Mother Y asoda could understand that Kr  a
was unnecessarily afraid , and for His benefit she wanted to allay His fears.
Being the topm ost well-wisher of her chil d , mother Yasoda began to
think , "If the child is too fearful of me , I don't know what will happen to
Him . " Mother Yasoda then threw away her stick. In order to punish Him,
she thought to bind His hands with some ropes. She did not know it , but
it was actually impossible for her to bind the Supreme Personality of God
head . Mother Yasoda was thinking that Kr  a was her tiny child ; she did
not know that the child had no limitation . There is no inside or outside of
Him , nor beginning or end. He is unlimited and all-pervading. Indeed , He
is Himself the whole cosmic manifestation. Still, mother Yasoda was
thinking of Kr  a as her child. Although He is beyond the reach of all
senses, she endeavored to bind Him up to a wooden grinding mortar . But
when she tried to bind Him, she found that the rope she was using was too
short-by two in ches . She gathered more rop s from the house and added
to it, but at the end she found the same shortage . In this way, she con
nected all the ro pes available at home , but when the final kno t was added ,
she saw that it was still two inches too short . Mother Y asoda was smiling,
but she was astonished . How was it happening?
66 Kr J}a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
In attemptingto bind her son, she became tired. She was perspiring, and
the garland on her head fell down. Then Lord Kr l).a appreciated the hard
labor of His mother , and being compassionate upon her, He agreed to be
bound up by the ropes. Kr va, playing as a human child in the house of
mother Y asoda, was performing His own selected pastimes. Of course no
one can control the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The pure devotee
surrenders himself unto the lotus feet of the Lord, who may either protect
or vanquish the devotee. But for his part, the devotee never forgets his
own position of surrender. Similarly, the Lord also feels transcendental
pleasure by submitting Himself to the protection of the devotee. This was
exemplified by Kr l).a 's surrender unto His mother, Y asoda.
Kr !la is the supreme bestower of all kinds of liberation to His devotees,
but the benediction which was bestowed up on mother Y asoda was never
experienced even by Lord Brahma or Lord Siva or the goddess of fortune.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as the son of
Yasoda and Nanda Maharaja, is never so completely known to the yogis
and speculators. But He is easily available to His devotees. Nor is He
appreciated as the supreme reservoir of all pleasure by the yogis and
speculators.
After binding her son, mother Y asoda engaged herself in household
affairs. At that time, bound up to the wooden mortar, Kr l).a could see a
pair of trees before Him which were known as arjuna trees. The great
reservoir of pleasure, Lord Sri Kr l).a, thus thought to Himself, "Mother
Y asoda first of all left without feeding Me sufficient milk, and therefore
I broke the pot of yogurt and distributed the stock butter in charity to the
monkeys. Now she has bound Me u p to a wooden mortar. So I shall do
something more mischievous than before." And thus He thought of pulling
down the two very tall arjuna trees.
There is a history behind the pair of arjuna trees. In their previous
lives, the trees were born as the human sons of Kuvera, and their names
were Nalakiivara and Ma tigriva. Fortunately, they came within the vision
of the Lord. In their previous lives they were cursed by the great sage
Narada in erder to receive the highest benediction of seeing Lord Kp l).a.
This benediction-curse was bestowed upon them because of their forget
fulness due to intoxication. This story will be narrated in the next chapter.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Ninth Chapter of Kr l).a,
"Mother Yasodii Binding Lord K[§[W. "
1 0 I Deliverance of N alakiivara
and Manigriva
The story of the cursing of N alakuvara and Mal)igrlva and their de
liverance by Kr l)a , under the all-blissful desire of the great sage Narada,
is here described.
The two great demigods, Nalakuvara and Mal)igri"va, were sons of the
treasurer of the demigods, Kuvera, who was a great devotee of Lord Siva.
By the grace of Lord Siva, Kuvera's material opulences had no limit. As a
rich man's sons often become addicted to wine and women , so these two
sons of Kuvera were also addicted to wine and sex. Once, these two demi
gods, desiring to enj oy, entered the garden of Lord Siva in the province of
Kailasa on the bank of Mandakini Ganges. There they drank much and
engaged in hearing the sweet singing of beautiful women who accompanied
them in that garden of fragrant flowers. In an intoxicated condition, they
both entered the water of the Ganges, which was full with lotus flowers,
and there they began to enjoy the company of the young girls exactly as
the male elephant enj oys the female elephants within the water.
While they were thus enj oying themselves in the water , all of a sudden
Narada, the great sage, happened to pass that way. He could understand
that the demigods Nalakuvara and Mal)igriva were too intoxicated and
could not even see that he was passing. The young girls, however, were
not so intoxicated as the demigods, and they at once became ashamed at
being naked before the great sage Narada. They began to c ver themselves
with all haste. The two demigod-sons of Kuvera were so intoxicated that
they could not appreciate the presence of the sage Narada and therefore
did not cover their bodies. On seeing the two demigods so degraded by
intoxication, Narada desired their welfare, and therefore he exhibited his
causeless mercy upon them by cursing them .
Because the great sage was compassionate upon them, he wanted to
finish their false enjoyment of intoxication and association with young
6 7
68 Kf J).a, the Supre me Perso nalit_y of Godhead
girls and wanted them to see Lord Kf l)a eye to eye. He conceived of
cursing them as follows. He said that the attraction for material enj oyment
is due to an increase of the mode of passion. A person in the material
world , when favored by the material o pulence of riches , generally be
comes addicted to three things-intoxication, sex and gambling. Materially
o pulent men, being puffed up with the accumulation of wealth, also
become so merciless tha.t they indulge in killing animals by opening
slaughterhouses. And they think that they themselves will never die. Such
foolish persons, forgetting the laws of nature, become overly infatuated
with the body. They forget that the material body, even though very much
advanced in civilization, up to the position of the demigods, will finally
be burned to ashes. And while one is living, whatever the external con
dition of the body may be, within there is only stool, urine and various
kinds of worms. Thus being engaged in j ealousy and violence to other
bodies , materialists cannot understand the ultimate goal of life , and with
out knowing this goal of life , they generally glide down to a hellish
condition. In their next birth, such foolish persons co mmit all kinds of
sinful activities on account of this temporary body , and they are even
unable to consider w hether this body actually belongs to them. Generally
it is said that the body belongs to the persons who feed the body . One
might therefore consider whether this body belongs to one personally or
to the master to whom one renders service . The master of slaves claims full
right to the bodies of the slaves because the master feeds the slaves. It may
be questioned then whether the body belongs to the father, who is the
seed-giving master of this body, or to the mother, who develo ps the child's
body in her womb.
Foolish persons are engaged in committing all sorts of sins due to the
misconception of identifying the material body with the self. But one
should be intelligt nt enough to understand to whom this body b dongs. A
foolish person indulges in killing other animals to maintain the body , but
he does not consider whether this body belongs to him or to his father or ,
mother or grandfather. Someti mes a grandfather or a father gives his-
daughter in charity to a person with a view of getting back the daughter's
child as a son. The body may also belong to a stronger man who forces
it to work for him . So metimes the slave's body is sold to the master on the
basis that the b ody will belong to the master. And at the end of life, the
body belongs to the fire, because the body is given to the fire and burned
to ashes. Or the body is thrown into the street to be eaten by the dogs
and vultures.
Before committing all kinds of sins to maintain the body, one should
Deliverance of N alakt1vara and Ma igriva 69
understand to whom the body belongs. Ultimately it is concluded that the
body is a product of material nature, and at the end it merges into material
nature; therefore, the conclusion should be that the body belongs to
material nature. One should not wrongly think that the body belongs to
him. To maintain a false possession, why should one indulge in killing?
Why should one kill innocent animals to maintain the body?
When a man is infatuated with the false prestige of opulence, he does
not care for any moral instruction but indulges in wine, women and animal
kiping. In such circumstances, a poverty-stricken man is often better
situated because a poor man thinks of himself in relation to other bodies.
A poor man often does not wish to inflict injuries to other bodies because
he can understand more readily that when he himself is injured he feels
pain. As such, the great sage Narada considered that because the demigods
Nalakuvara and Ma igriva were so infatuated by false prestige, they should
be put into a condition of life devoid of opulence.
A person who has a pinprick in his body does not wish others to be
pricked by pins; a considerate man in the life of poverty does not wish
others to be also put into that condition. Generally it is seen that oile who
has risen from a poverty-stricken life and becomes wealthy creates some
charitable institution at the end of his life so that other poverty-stricken
men might be benefitted. In short, a compassionate poor man may con
sider others' pains and pleasures with empathy. A poor man may be
seldom puffed with false pride, and he may be freed from all kinds of
infatuation. He may remain satisfied by whatever he gets for his main
tenance by the grace of the Lord.
To remain in the poverty -stricken condition is a kind of austerity.
According to Vedic culture, therefore, the briihmar-as, as a matter of
routine, keep themselves in a poverty-stricken condition to save them
selves from the false prestige of material opulence. False prestige due to
advancement of material prosperity is a great impediment for spiritual
emancipation. A poverty -stricken man cannot become unnaturally fat by
eating more and more. And on account of not being able to eat more than
he requires, his senses are not very turbulent. When the senses are not
very turbulent, he cannot become violent .
Another advantage of poverty is that a saintly person can easily enter a
poor man's house, and thus the poor man can take advantage of the
saintly person's association. A very opulent man does not allow anyone to
enter his house; therefore, the saintly person cannot enter. According to
the V edic system, a saintly person takes the position of a mendicant so
that on the plea of begging somdhing from the householder, he can enter
70 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
any house. The householder, who has usually forgotten everything about
spiritual advancement because he is busy maintaining family affairs, can
be benefitted by the association of a saintly person. There is a great
chance for the poor man to become liberated through association with a
saint. Of what use are persons who are puffed up with material o pulence
and prestige if they are bereft of the association of saintly persons and
devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead?
The great sage Narada thereafter thought that it was his duty to put
those demigods into a condition where they could not be falsely proud
of their material opulence and prestige. Narada was compassionate and
wanted to save them from their fallen life. They were in the mode of
darkness, and being therefore unable to control their senses, they were
addicted to sex life. It was the duty of a saintly person like Narada to save
them from their abominable condition. In animal life, the animal has no
sense to understand that he is naked. But Kuvera was the treasurer of the
demigods, a very responsible man, and N alakiivara and Ma!tigriva were two
of his sons. And yet they became so animalistic and irresponsible that
they could not understand, due to intoxication, that they were naked. To
cover the lower part of the body is a principle of human civilization, and
when a man or woman forgets this principle, they become degraded.
Narada therefore thought that the best punishment for them was to make
them immovable living entities, or trees. Trees are, by nature's laws,
immovable. Although trees are covered by the mode of ignorance, they
cannot do harm. The great sage Narada thought it fitting that, although
the brothers, by his mercy, would be ,,punished to become trees, they
continue to keep their memory to be able to know why they were being
punished. After changing the · ·body, a living entity generally forgets his
previous life, but in special cases, by the grace of the Lord, as with Nala
kiivara and Ma tigriva, one can remember.
Sage Narada therefore contemplated that the two demigods should
remain for one hundred years, in the time of the demigods, in the form of
trees, and after that they would be fortunate enough to see the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, face to face, by His causeless mercy. And thus
they would be again promoted to the life of the demigods and great
devotees of the Lord.
After this, the great sage Narada returned to his abode known as Naraya!la
Asrama, and the two demigods turned into trees, known as twin arjuna
trees. The two demigods were favored by the causeless mercy of Narada
and given a chance to grow in Nanda's courtyard and see Lord Krwa face
to face.
Deliverance of Nalakiivara and Ma igriva 71
Although the child Kn!!a was bound up to the wooden mortar, He
began to proceed towards the growing trees in order to fulfill the prophecy
of His great devotee Narada. Lord Kn!la knew that Narada was His great
devotee and that the trees standing before Him as twin arjuna trees were
actually the sons of Kuvera. "I must now fulfill the words of My great
devotee Narada," He thought. Then He began to proceed through the
passage between the two trees. Although He was able to pass through the
passage, the large wooden mortar stuck horizontally between the trees.
Taking advantage of this, Lord Knva began to pull the rope which was
tied to the mortar. As soon as He pulled, with great strength, the two
trees, with all branches and limbs, fell down immediately  with a great
sound. Out of the broken, fallen trees came two great personalities, shining
like blazing fire. All sides became illuminated and beautiful by their
presence. The two purified bodies immediately came before child Krwa
and bowed down to offer their respects and prayers in the following words.
"Dear Lord Krwa, You are the original Personality of Godhead, master
of all mystic powers. Learned b riihmarr-as know very well that this cosmic
manifestation is an expansion of Your potencies which are sometimes
manifest and sometimes unmanifest. You are the original provider of the
life, body and senses of all living entities. You are the eternal God, Lord
Viwu, who is all-pervading, the principal controller of everything. You are
the original source of the cosmic manifestation which is acting under the
spell of the three modes of material nature goodness, passion and igno
rance. You are living as the Supersoul in all the multi-forms of living
entities, and You know very well what is going on within their bodies and
minds. Therefore You are the supreme director of all activities of all living
entities. But although You are in the midst of everything which is under
the spell of the material modes of nature, You are not affected by such
contaminated qualities. No one under the jurisdiction of the material
modes can understand Your transcendental qualities, which existed before
the creation; therefore You are called the Supreme Brahman who is always
glorified by His personal internal potencies. In this material world You can
be known only by Your different incarnations. Although You assume
different types of bodies, these bodies are not part of the material creation.
They are always full of transcendental potencies of unlimited opulence,
strength, beauty, fame, wisdom and renunciation. In the material existence,
there is a difference between the body and the owner of the body, but
because You appear in Your original spiritual body, there is no such
difference for You. When You appear, Your uncommon activities indicate
that You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such uncommon
72 Kr t;ta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
activities are not possible for anyone in material existence. You are that
Supreme Personality of Godhead, now appearing to cause the birth and
death as well as liberation of the living , entities, and You are full with all
Your plenary expansions. You can bestow on everyone all kinds of
benediction. 0 Lord ! 0 source of all fortune and goodness, we offer our
respectful obeisances unto You. You are the all-pervading Supreme Per
sonality of Godhead, the source of peace and the supreme person in the
dynasty of King Yadu. 0 Lord, our father known as Kuvera, the demigod,
is Your servant . Similarly, the great sage Narada is also Your servitor, and
by their grace only we have been able to see You personally. We therefore
pray that we may always he engaged in Your transcendental loving service
by speaking only about Y our glories and hearing about Your transcenden
tal activities. May our hands and other limbs he engaged in Your service and
our minds always he concentrated at Y our lotus feet and our heads always
bowed down before the all-pervading universal form of Y our Lordship."
When the demigods Nalakiivara and Mal).igriva finished their prayers,
the child, Lord Kr l).a, the master and proprietor of Gokula, hound to the
wooden grinding mortar by the ropes of Yasoda, began to smile and said ,
"It was already known to Me that My great devotee-sage N arada had
shown his causeless mercy by saving you from the abominable condition
of pride due to possessing extraordinary beauty and opulence in the
family of the demigods. He has saved you from gliding down into the
lowest condition of hellish life. All these facts are already known to Me.
You are very fortunate because you were not only cursed by him, hut you
had the great opportunity to see him. If someone is able, by chance, to see
a great saintly person like Narada face to face, who is always serene and
merciful to everyone, then immediately that conditioned soul becomes
liberated. This is exactly like being situated in the full light of the sun:
there cannot he any visionary impediment. Therefore, 0 Nalakiivara and
Mal).igriva, your lives have now become successful because you have
developed ecstatic love for Me. This is your last birth within material
existence. Now you can go hack to your father 's residence in the heavenly
planet, and by remaining in the attitude of devotional service, you will
he liberated in this very life."
After this, the demigods circumambulated the Lord many times and
bowed down before Him again and again, and thus they left . The Lord
remained hound up with ropes to the grinding mortar.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Tenth Chapter of Krwa,
"Deliverance of Nalakfivara and Marigriva. "
l l I Killing the Demons
V atsasura and Bakasura
When the twin a rju na trees fell to the ground, making a sound like the
falling of thunderbolts, all the inhabitants of Gokula, including Nanda
Maharaj a , immediately came to the spot . They were very much astonished
to see how the two great trees had suddenly fallen. Because they could
find no reason for their falling down, they were puzzled. When they saw
child Kr§!la bound up to the wooden mortar by the ropes of Y asoda, they
began to think that it must have been caused by some demon. Otherwise,
how was it possible? At the same time, they were very much perturbed
because such uncommon incidences were always happening to the child
Kr§!la. While the elderly cowherd men were thus contemplating, the small
children who were playing there informed the men that the trees fell due
to Kf§!!a's pulling the wooden mortar with the ropes to which He _was
bound. " Kr§!la came in between the two trees," they explained, "and the
wooden mortar was topsy-turvied and stuck in between the trees. Kr§!la
began to pull the rope, and the trees fell down . When the trees fell down ,
two very dazzling men came out of the trees, and they began to talk to
Krsna. "
Most of the cowherd men did not believe the statement of the children.
They could not believe that such things were at all possible. Some of them,
however , believed them and told Nanda Maharaj a , "Your child is different
from all other children. He just might have done it." Nand a Maharaj a began
to smile , hearing about the extraordinary abilities of his son. He came for
ward and untied the knot just to free his wonderful child. After being freed
by Nanda Maharaja, Kr§!la was taken onto the laps of the elderly go pis.
They took Him away to the courtyard of the house and began to clap , prais
ing His wonderful activities. Kr§!la began to clap along with them , just like
an ordinary child. The Supreme Lord Kf§!la , being completely controlled
by the go pis, began to sing and dance, just like a puppet in their hands.
73
74 KHt;ta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Sometimes mother Y asoda used to ask Kr§t;J.a to bring her a wooden
plank for sitting. Although the wooden plank was too heavy to be carried
by a child, still somehow or other Kr§t;J.a would bring it to His mother.
Sometimes while worshiping Narayat;J.a, His father would ask Him to
bring his wooden slippers, and Kr§t;J.a, with great difficulty, would put the
slippers on His head and bring them to His _ father. When He was asked to
lift some heavy article and was unable to lift it, He would simply move His
arms. In this way, daily, at every moment, He was the reservoir of all
pleasure to His parents. The Lord was exhibiting such childish activities
before the inhabitants of V rndavana because He wanted to show the great
philosophers and sages searching after the Absolute Truth how the Supreme
Absolute Truth Personality of Godhead is controlled by and subject to the
desires of His pure devotees.
One day, a fruit vendor came before the house of N anda Maharaja.
Upon hearing the vendor call, "If anyone wants fruits please come and
take them from me!" child Kf§t;J.a immediately took some grains in His
palm and went to get fruits in exchange. In those days exchange was by
barter ; therefore Kr§t;J.a might have seen His parents exchange fruits and
other things by bartering grains, and so He imitated. But His palms were
very small, and He was not very careful to hold them tight, so He was
dropping the grains. The vendor who came to sell fruits saw this and was
very much captivated by the beauty of the Lord, so he immediately
accepted whatever few grains were left in His palm and filled His hands
with fruits. In this meantime, the vendor saw that his whole basket of
fruit had become filled with jewels. The Lord is the bestower of all
benediction. If someone gives something to the Lord, he is not the loser ;
he is the gainer by a million times.
One day Lord Kf§t;J.a, the liberator of the twin arjuna trees, was playing
with Balarama and the other children on the bank of the Yamuna, and
because it was already late in the morning, Rohit;J.i, the mother of
Balarama, went to call them back home. But Balarama and Krwa were
so engrossed in playing with Their friends that They 'did not wish to come
back; They just engaged Themselves in playing more and more. When
Rohit;J.i was unable to take Them back home, she went home and sent
mother Y asoda to call Them again. Mother Y asoda was so affectionate
toward her son that as soon as she came out to call Him back home, her
breast filled u p with milk. She loudly cried, "My dear child, please come
back home. Your time for lunch is already past." She then said, "My
dear Kr§t;J.a, 0 my dear lotus-eyed child, please come and suck my breast.
You have played enough. You must be very hungry, my dear little child.
Killing the Demons V atsasura and Bakasura 75
You must be tired from playing for so long. " She also addressed Balarama
thus: "My dear , the glory of Your family, please come back with Your
younger brother Kr !la immediately. You have been engaged in playing
since morning, and Y ou must be very tired. Please come b ack and take
Y c:>ur lunch at home . Your father Nandaraj a is waiting for You. He has to
eat, so You must come back so that he can eat . "
As soon a s Krwa and Balarama heard that Nanda Maharaj a was waiting
for Them and could not take his food in Their absence , They started to
return. Their other playmates complained , "Kr pa is leaving us just at the
point when our playing is at the summit. Next time we shall not allow Him
to leave . "
His playmates then threatened not to allow H i m to play with them
again. Kr pa became afraid , and instead of going back home , He went
back again to play with the boys. At that time , mother Y asoda scolded the
children and told Kr !la, "My dear Kr !la, do You think that You are a
street boy? You have no home? Please come back to Your home ! I see
that Your body has become very dirty from playing since early morning.
Now come home and take Your hath. Besides, today is Your birthday
ceremony ; therefore You should come back home and give cows in charity
to the briihmm;ws. D on't You see how Your playmates are decorated with
ornaments by their mothers? You should also be cleansed and decorated
with nice dress and ornaments. Please , therefore , come back , take Y our
b ath, dress Yourself nicely, and then again You may go on playing. "
In this way mother Y asoda called back Lord Krwa and Balarama who
are worshipahle by great demigods like Lord Brahma and Lord Siva. She
was thinking of Them as her children.
When mother Yasoda 's children, Kr pa and Balarama, came home , she
bathed Them very nicely and dressed Them with ornaments. She then
called for the briihmar;ws, and through her children she gave many cows
in charity for the occasion of Krwa's birthday. In this way she performed
the birthday ceremony of Kr !la at home.
After this incident , all the elderly members of the · cowherd men
assembled together, and Nanda Maharaja presided. They began to consult
amongst themselves how to stop great disturbances in the Mahavana on
account of the demons. In this meeting, Upananda, brother of Nanda
Maharaj a , was present. He was considered to be learned and experienced ,
and he was a well-wisher o f Kr !la and Balarama. He was a leader, and he
began to address the meeting as follows : "My dear friends! Now we should
leave here for another place because we are continually finding that great
demons are coming here to disturb the peaceful situation, and they are
76 Kf l)a , the Supreme Perso nality of Godhead
especially attempting to kill the small children. Just consider Piitana and
Kr§ a. It was simply by the grace of Lord Hari that Kr§ a was saved from
the hands of such a great demon. Next the whirlwind demon took Kr§ a
away in the sky, but by the grace of Lord H ari He was saved, and the
demon fell down on a stone slab and died. Very recently, this child was
playing between two trees, and the trees fell down violently, and yet there
was no injury to the child. So Lord Hari saved Him again. Just imagine the
calamity if this child or any other child playing with Him were crushed by
the falling trees ! Considering all these incidences , we must conclude that
this place is no longer safe. Let us leave. We have all been saved from
different calamities b y the grace of Lord Hari. N ow we should be cautious
and leave this place and reside somewhere where we can live peacefully.
I think that we should all go to the forest known as V rndavana, where just
now there are newly grown plants and herbs. It is very suitable for
pasturing ground for our cows , and we and our families , the gopis with
their children , can very peacefully live there. N ear Vrndavana there is
Govardhana Hill, which is very beautiful, and there is newly grown grass
and fodder for the animals , so there will be no difficulty in living there.
I therefore suggest that we start immediately for that beautiful place , as
there is no need to waste any more time. Let us prepare all our carts
immediately, and , if you like, let us go , keeping all the cows in front. ':
On hearing the statement of U pananda, all the cowherd men immediately
agreed. "Let us immediately go there. " Everyone then loaded all their
household furniture and utensils on the carts and prepared to go to
Vrndavana. All the old men of the village , the children and women were
arranged on seats, and the cowherd men equipped themselves with bows
and arrows to follow the carts. All the cows and bulls along with their
calves were placed in the front , and the men surrounded the flocks with
their bows and arrows and began to blow on their horns and bugles. In this
way, with tu multuous sound , they started for Vrndavana.
And who can describe the damsels of Vraj a? They were all seated on the
carts and were very beautifully dressed with ornaments and costly saris.
They began to chant the pastimes of child Kr§ a as usual. Mother Y asoda
and mother Rohi i were seated on a separate cart , and Kr§ a and Balarama
were seated on their laps. · While mother Rohi i and Y asoda were riding
on the cart, they talked to Kf§l)a and Balarama, and feeling the pleasure of
such talks, they looked very, very beautiful.
In this way, after reaching V rndavana, where everyone lives eternally,
very peacefully and happily, they encircled Vrndavana and kept the carts
all together. After seeing the beautiful appearance of Govardhana on the
Killing the Demons V atsasura and Bakasura 77
bank of the River Yamuna, they began to construct their places of
residence. While those of the same age were walking together and children
were talking with their parents, the inhabitants of Vrndavana felt very
happy.
At this time K[ l).a and Balarama were given charge of the calves. The
first responsibility of the cowherd boys was to take care of the little calves.
The boys are trained in this from the very beginning of their childhood. So
along with other little cowherd boys, K[ l).a and Balarama went into the
pasturing ground and took charge of the calves and played with Their
playmates. While taking charge of the calves, sometimes the two brothers
played on Their flutes. And sometimes They played with iimalaki:fruits and
bael fruits, just like small children play with balls. Sometimes They danced
and made tinkling sounds with Their ankle bells. Sometimes They made
Themselves into bulls and cows by covering Themselves with blankets.
Thus K[ l).a and Balarama played. The two brothers also used to imitate
the sounds of bulls and cows and play at bullfighting. Sometimes They used
to imitate the sounds of various animals and birds. In this way, They en
joyed Their childhood pastimes apparently like ordinary, mundane children.
Once, when K[ l).a and Balarama were playing on the bank of the
Yamuna, a demon of the name Vatsasura assumed the shape of a calf and
came there intending to kill the brothers. By taking the shape of a calf,
the demon could mingle with other calves. Kr va, however, specifically
noticed this, and He immediately told Balarama about the entrance of the
demon. Both brothers then followed him and sneaked u p upon him. K[ l).a
caught hold of the demon-calf by the two hind legs and tail, whipped him
around very forcibly and threw him up into a tree. The demon lost his life
and fell down from the top of the tree to the ground. When the demon
lay dead on the ground, all the playmates of K[ l).a congratulated Him,
"Well done, well done," and the demigods in the sky began to shower
flowers with great satisfaction. In this way, the maintainers of the com
plete creation, K[ l).a and Balarama, used to take care of the calves in the
morning every day, and thus They enjoyed Their childhood pastimes as
cowherd boys in v rndavana.
All the cowherd boys would daily go to the bank of the River Yamuna
to water their calves. Usually, when the calves drank water from the
Yam una, the boys also drank. One day, after drinking, when they were
sitting on the bank of the river, they saw a huge animal which looked
something like a duck and was as big as a hill. Its top was as strong as a
thunderbolt. When they saw that unusual animal, they became afraid of it.
The name of this beast was Bakasura, and he was a friend of Kamsa's. He
78 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appeared on the scene suddenly and immediately attacked Kr 11a with his
pointed, sharp beaks and quickly swallowed Him up. When Kr  a was
thus swallowed, all the boys, headed by Balarama, became almost breath
less, as if they had died. But when the Bakasura demon was swall owing
up Kr  a, he felt a burning fiery sensation in his throat. This was due to
the glowing effulgence of Kr  ta. The demon quickly threw Krwa up and
tried to kill Him by pinching Him in his beaks. Bakasura did not know
that although Kr tla was playing the part of a child of Nanda Maharaja,
He was still the original father of Lord Brahma, the creator of the universe.
The child of mother Y asoda, who is the reservoir of pleasure for the demi
gods and who is the maintainer of saintly persons, caught hold of the
beaks of the great gigantic duck and, before His cowherd boy friends ,
bifurcated his mouth, just as a child very easily splits a , blade of grass.
From the sky, the denizens of the heavenly planets showered flowers like
the cameli, the most fragrant of all flowers, as a token of their congratula
tions. Accompanying the showers of flowers was a vibration of bugles,
drums and conchshells.
When the boys saw the showering of flowers and heard the celestial
sounds, they became struck with wonder. When they saw Kr va, they all,
including Balarama, were so pleased that it seemed as if they had regained
their very source of life. As soon as they saw Kr 11a coming towards them,
they one after another embraced the son of N anda and held Him to their
chests. After this, they assembled all the calves under their charge and
began to return home.
When they arrived home, they began to speak of the wonderful activities
of the son of Nanda. When the gopis and cowherd men all heard the story
from the boys, they felt great happiness because naturally they loved
Kr va, and hearing about His glories and victorious activities, they became
still more affectionate toward Him. Thinking that the child Kr  a was
saved from the mouth of death, they began to see His face with great love
and affection. They were full of anxieties, but they could not turn their
faces from the vision of Kr J1a. The gopis and the men began to converse
amongst themselves about how the child Kr  a was attacked in so many
ways and so many times by so many demons, and yet the demons were
killed and Kr  a was uninjured. They continued to converse amongst
themselves about how so many great demons in such fierce bodies attacked
Kn a to kill Him, but by the grace of Hari, they could not cause even a
slight injury. Rather, they died like small flies in a fire. Thus they remem
bered the words of Gargamuni who foretold, by dint of his vast knowledge
of the Vedas and astrology, that this boy would be attacked by many
Killing the Demons V atsasura and Bakasura 79
demons. Now they actually saw that this was coming true, word for word.
All the elderly cowherd men, including Nanda Maharaja, used to talk of
the wonderful activities of Lord Kf l).a and Balarama, and they were
always so much absorbed in those talks that they forgot the threefold
miseries of this material existence. This is the effect of Kf l).a conscious
ness. What was enjoyed 5,000 years ago by N anda Maharaj a can still be
enjoyed by persons who are in Kf l).a consciousness simply by talking
about the transcendental pastimes of Kf l).a and His associates.
Thus both Balarama and Kf l).a enjoyed Their childhood pastimes,
imitating the monkeys of Lord Ramacandra who constructed the bridge
over the ocean and Hanuman, who jumped o ver the water to Ceylon.
And They used to imitate such pastimes among Their friends and so
happily passed Their childhood life.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Eleventh Chapter of Kf l).a,
"Killing the Demons Vatsiisura and Bakiisura. "
1 2 I The Killing of the Aghasura D emon
Once the Lord desired to go early in the morning with all His cowherd
boy friends to the forest , where they were to assemble together and take
lunch. As soon as He got up from bed, He blew a buffalo horn and called
all His friends together. Keeping the calves before them , they started for
the forest . In this way , Lord Krwa assembled thousands of His boy
friends. They were each equipped with a stick , flute and horn as well as
lunch bag, and each of them was taking care of thousands of calves. All
the boys appeared very j olly and happy in that excursion. Each and every
one of them was attentive for his personal calves. The boys were fully
decorated with various kinds of golden ornaments , and out of sporting
propensities they began to pick up flowers , leaves , twigs , peacock feathers
and red clay from different places in the forest , and they began to dress
themselves in different ways. While passing through the forest , one boy
stole another boy's lunch package and passed it to a third. And when the
boy whose lunch package was stolen came to know of it , he tried to take
it back. But one threw it to another boy. This sportive playing went on
amongst the boys as childhoo d pastimes.
When Lord Kr !la went ahead to a distant place in order to see some
specific scenery , the boys behind Him tried to run to catch up and be the
first to touch Him . So there was a great competition. One would say, "I
will go there and touch Kr Qa , " and another would say, "Oh you cannot
go . I 'll touch Krwa first . " Some of them played on their flutes or vibrated
bugles made of buffalo horn . Some of them gladly followed the peacocks
and imitated the onomatopoetic sounds of the cuckoo. While the birds
were flying in the sky , the boys ran after the birds' shadows along the
ground and tried to follow their exact courses. Some of them went to the
monkeys and silently sat down by them , and some of them imitated the
dancing of the peacocks . Some of them caught the tails of the monkeys and
80
The Killing of the Aghasura Demon 8 1
played with them, and when the monkeys jumped i n a tree, the boys also
followed. When a monkey showed its face and teeth, a boy imitated and
showed his teeth to the monkey. Some of the boys played with the frogs
on the bank of the Yamuna, and when, out of fear, the frogs jumped in
the water, the boys immediately dove in after them, and they would come
out of the water when they saw their own shadows and stand imitating,
making caricatures <md laughing. They would also go to an empty well and
make loud sounds, and when the echo came back, they would call it ill
names and laugh.
As stated personally by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the
Bhagavad-gita, He ·is realized proportionately by transcendentalists as
Brahman, Paramatma and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Here, in
confirmation of the same statement, Lord Kf l).a , who awards the imper
sonalist Brahman realization by His bodily effulgence, also gives pleasure
to the devotees as the Supreme Personality of Godhead . Those who are
under the spell of external energy, maya, take Him only as a beautiful
child . Yet He gave full transcendental pleasure to the cowherd boys who
played with Him. Only after accumulating heaps of pious activities, those
boys were promoted to personally associate with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. Who can estimate the transcendental fortune of the residents
of Vrndavana? They were personally visualizing the Supreme Personality
of Godhead face to face , He whom many yogis cannot find even after
undergoing severe austerities, although He is sitting within the heart. This
is also confirmed in the Brah ma-samhita. One may search for Kr pa the
Supreme Personality of Godhead through the pages of the Vedas and
Upani ads, but if one is fortunate enough to associate with a devotee, he
can see the Supreme Personality of Godhead face to face. After accumu
lating pious activities in many, many previou s lives , the cowherd boys
were seeing Kr pa face to face and playing with Him as friends. They
could not understand that Kr l).a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead ,
but they .were playing as intimate friends with intense love for Him.
When Lord Kf l).a was enj oying His childhood pastimes with His boy
friends, one Aghasura demon became very impatient. He was unable to
see Kr l).a playing, so he appeared before the boys intending to kill them
all. This Aghasura was so dangerous that even the denizens of heaven were
afraid of him. Although the denizens of heaven drank nectar daily to
prolong their lives, they were afraid of this Aghasura and were wondering,
"When will the demon be killed ? " The denizens used to drink nectar to
become immortal , but actually they were not confident of their immor
tality . On the other hand , the boys w ho w ere play ing wit h Kr  ·a had no
82 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
fear of the demons. They were free of fear. Any material arrangement for
protecting oneself from death is always unsure, but if one is in Kr  a
consciousness, then immortality is confidently assured.
The demon Aghasura appeared before Kr \la and His friends. Aghasura
happened to be the younger brother of Piitana and Bakasura, and he
thought, "Kr l).a has killed my brother and sister. Now I shall kill Him
along with all His friends and calves." Aghasura was instigated by Kamsa,
so he had come with determination. Aghasura also began to think that
when he would offer grains and water in memory of his brother and kill
Kr va and all the cowherd boys, then automatically all the 'inhabitants of
Vrndavana would die. Generally, for the householders, the children are
the life and breath force. When all the children die, then naturally the
parents also die on account of strong affection for them.
Aghasura, thus deciding to kill all the inhabitants of Vrndavana, ex
panded himself by the yogic siddhi called mahimii. The demons are
generally expert in achieving almost all kinds of mystic powers. In the
yoga system, by the perfection called mahima-siddhi, one can expand
himself as he desires. The demon Aghasura expanded himself u p to eight
miles and assumed the shape of a very fat serpent. Having attained this
wonderful body, he stretched his mouth o pen just like a mountain cave.
Desiring to swallow all the boys at once, including Kr  m and Balarama, he
sat on the path.
The demon in the shape of a big fat serpent expanded his lips from land
to sky ; his lower lip was touching the ground and his upper lip was
touching the clouds. His jaws appeared like a big mountain cave, without
limitation, and his teeth appeared j ust like mountain summits. His tongue
appeared to be a broad traffic way, and he was breathing just like a
hurricane. The fire of his eyes was blazing. At first the boys thought that
the demon was a statue, but after examining it, they saw that it was more
like a big serpent lying down in the road and widening his mouth. The
boys began to talk among themselves: "This figure appears to be ,a great
animal, and he is sitting in such a posture just to swallow us all. Just see
is it not a big snake that has widened his mouth to eat all of us?"
One of them said, "Yes, what you say is true. This animal's upper lip
appears to be just like the sunshine, and its lower lip is just like the
reflection of red sunsh..1e on the ground. Dear friends, just look to the
right and left hand side of the mouth of the animal. Its mouth appears to
be like a big mountain cave, and its height cannot be estimated. The chin
is also raised just like a mountain summit. That long highway appears to
be its tongue, and inside the mouth it is as dark as in a mountain cave. The
The Killing of the Aghasura Demon 83
hot wind that is blowing like a hurricane is his breathing, and the fishy
bad smell coming out from his mouth is the smell of his intestines."
Then they further consulted among themselves: "If we all at one time
entered into the mouth of this great serpent, how could it possibly swallow
all of us? And even if it were to swallow all of us at once, it could not
swallow Kf J)-a. Kf l)-a will immediately kill him, as He did Bakasura."
Talking in this way, all the boys looked at the beautiful lotus-like face of
Kf l)-a, and they began to clap and smile. And so they marched forward
and entered the mouth of the gigantic serpent.
Meanwhile, Kr l)-a, who is the Supersoul within everyone's heart, could
understapd that the big statuesque figure was a demon. While He was
planning how to stop the destruction of His intimate friends, all the boys
along with their cows and calves entered the mouth of the serpent. But
Kf l)-a did not enter. The demon was awaiting Kf l)-a's entrance, and he
was thinking, "Everyone has entered except Kf l)-a, who has killed my
brothers and sisters."
Kf l)-a is the assurance of safety to everyone. But when He saw that His
friends were already out of His hands and were lying within the belly of a
great serpent. He became, momentarily, aggrieved. He was also struck with
wonder how the external energy works so wonderfully. He then began to
consider how the demon should be killed and how he could save the boys
and calves. Although there was no factual concern on Kf l)-a's part, He
was thinking like that. Finally, after some deliberation, He also entered
the mouth of the demon. When Kr l)-a entered, all the demigods, who had
gathered to see the fun and who were hiding within the clouds, began to
express their feelings with the words, "Alas ! alas ! " At the same time, all
the friends of Aghasura, especially Karnsa, who were all accustomed to
eating flesh and blood, began to express their jubilation, understanding
that Kr t:la had also entered the mouth of the demon.
While the demon was trying to smash Kf l)-a and His companions,
Kf l)-a heard the demigods crying, "Alas, alas," and He immediately began
to expand Himself within the throat of the demon. Although he had a
gigantic body, the demon choked by the expanding of Kr J)-a. His big eyes
moved violently, and he quickly suffocated. His life-air could not come
out from any SO}lrcc, and ultimately it burst out of a hole in the upper
part of his skull. Thus his life-air passed off. After the demon dropped
dead, Kr t;Ia, with His transcendental glance alone, brought all the boys
and calves back to consciousness and came with them out of the mouth
of the demon. While Kf§l)-a was within the mouth of Aghasura, the demon's
spirit soul came out like a dazzling light, illuminating all directions, and
84 Kf l}a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
waited in the sky. As soon as Kr l!a with His calves and friends came out
of the mouth of the demon, that glittering effulgent light immediately
merged into the body of Kr 11a within the vision of all the demigods.
The demigods became overwhelmed with joy and began to shower
flowers on the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kr 11a, and thus they
worshiped Him. The denizens of heaven began to dance in j ubilation, and
the denizens in Gandharvaloka began to offer various kinds of prayers.
Drummers began to beat drums in jubilation, the brtihmartas began to
recite Vedic hymns, and all the devotees of the Lord began to chant the
words, "]aya! ]aya! All glories to the Supreme Personality of Godhead ! "
When Lord Brahma heard those auspicious vibrations which sounded
throughout the higher planetary system, he immediately came down to
see what had happened. He saw that the demon was killed, and he was
struck with wonder at the uncommon glorious pastimes of the Personality
of Godhead. The gigantic mouth of the demon remained in an open
position for many days and gradually dried u p ; it remained a spot of
pleasure pastimes for all the cowherd boys.
The killing of Aghasura took place when Kr 11a and all His boy friends
were under five years old. Children under five years old are called kaumtira.
After five years up to the tenth year they are called paugartlJa, and after
the tenth year up to the fifteenth year they are called kaisora. After the
fifteenth year, boys are called youths. So for one year there was no
discussion of the incident of the Aghasura demon in the village of Vraja.
But when they attained their sixth year, they informed their parents of
the incident with great wonder. The reason for this will be clear in the
next chapter.
For Sri Kr 11a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is far greater
than such demigods as Lord Brahma, it is not at all difficult to award one
the opportunity of merging with His eternal body. This He awarded to
Aghasura. Aghasura was certainly the most sinful living entity, and it is
not possible for the sinful to merge into the existence of the Absolute
Truth. But in this particular case, because Kr 11a entered into Aghasura's
body, the demon became fully cleansed of all sinful reaction. Persons
constantly thinking of the eternal form of the Lord in the shape of the
Deity or in the shape of a mental form are awarded the transcendental
goal of entering into the kingdom of God and associating with the Su
preme Personality of Godhead. So we can just imagine the elevated
position of someone like Aghasura into whose body the Supreme Per
sonality of Godhead , Kr  a, personally entered. Great sages, meditators
and devotees constantly keep the form of the Lord within the heart , or
The Killing of the Aghasura Demon 85
they see the D eity form of the Lord in the temples ; in that way, they
beco me liberated fro m all material contamination and at the end of the
body enter into the kingdom of God. This perfection is possible simply by
keeping the form of the Lord within the mind. But in the case of Aghasura,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead personally entered. Aghasura's posi
tion was therefore greater than the ordinary devotee's or the greatest
_,
yogt s.
Maharaj a Parik it, who was engaged in hearing the transcendental
pastimes of Lord Kr !la (who saved the life of Maharaj a Parik it while he
was in the wo mb of his mother ) , became more and more interested to
hear about Him. And thus he questioned the sage Sukadeva Gosvami', who
was reciting Srimad-Bhiigavatam before the King.
King Parik it was a bit astonished to understand that the killing of the
Aghasura demon was not discussed for one year, until after the b oys
attained the paugm;u;lr: age . Maharaj a Parik it was very inquisitive to learn
this , for he was sur  that such an incident was due to the working of
Kr !la 's different energies.
Generally, the k§atriyas or the administrative class are always busy with
their political affairs , and they have very little chance to hear about the
transcendental pastimes of Lord Kr !la. But while Parik it Maharaj a was
hearing these transcendental pastimes , he considered himself to be very
fortunate because he was hearing from Sukadeva Gosvami', the greatest
authority on the Srimad-Bhiigavatam. Thus being requested by Maharaj a
Pari'k it , Sukadeva Gosvami' continued to speak about the transcendental
pastimes of Lord Kr !la in the matter of His form , quality , fame and
paraphernalia.
Thus ends the Bhak tivedanta purport of the Twelfth Chapter of Kr !la,
"The Killing of the Aghiisura De mon. "
1 3 I The Stealing of t e Boys
and Calves by Brahma
Sukadeva Gosvami was very much encouraged when Maharaja Parik it
asked him why the cowherd boys did not discuss the death of Aghasura
until after one year had passed. He explained thu s : "My dear King, you
are making the subj ect  atter of the transcendental pastimes of Kr  1a
fresher by your inquisitiveness . "
I t i s said that i t i s the nature of a devotee t o constantly apply his mind,
energy, words, ears, etc. , in hearing and chanting about Kr  a. This is
called Kr  a consciousness, and for'-- one who is rapt in hearing and
chanting Kr  a , the subj ect matter never becomes hackneyed or old. That
is the significance of transcendental subej ct batter in contrast to material
subject matter. Material subject matter becomes stale, and one cannot hear
a certain subject for a long time ; he wants change. But as far as transcen
dental subj ect matter is concerned, it is called nityanavanaviiyamiina. This
means that one can go on chanting and hearing about the Lord and never
feel tired but will remain fresh and eager to hear more and more.
It is the duty of the spiritual master to disclose all confidential subj ect
matter to the inquisitive and sincere disciple. Thus Sukadeva Gosvami
began to explain why the killing of Aghasura was not discussed until one
year had passed. Sukadeva Gosvami told the King, "Now hear of this
secret with attention. After saving His friends from the mouth of Aghasura
and after killing the demon, Lord Kr  a brought His friends to the bank
of Yamuna and addressed them as follows : 'My dear friends, just see how
this spot is very nice for taking lunch and playing on the soft sandy
Yamuna bank. You can see how the lotus flowers in the water are
beautifully blown and how they distribute their flavor all around. The
chirping of the birds along with cooing of the peacocks, surrounded by
the whispering of the leaves in the trees, combine and present sound
vibrations that echo one another. And this just enriches the beautiful
86
The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by Brahma 87
scenery created by the trees here. Let us have our lunch in this spot
because it is already late and we are feeling hungry. Let the calves remain
near us, and let them drink water from the Yam una. While we engage in
our lunch-taking, the calves may engage in eating the soft grasses that are
in this spot."'
On hearing this proposal from Kr  a, all the boys became very glad and
said, . "Certainly, let us all sit down here to take our lunch." They then let
loose the calves to eat the soft grass. Sitting down on the ground and
keeping Kr  a in the center, they began to open their different boxes
brought from home. Lord Sri Kr  a was seated in the center of the circle,
and all the boys kept their faces toward Him. They ate and constantly
enjoyed seeing the Lord face to face. Kr  a appeared to be the whorl of a
lotus flower, and the boys surrounding Him appeared to be its different
petals. The boys collected flowers, leaves of flowers and the barks of trees
and placed them under their different boxes, and thus they began to eat
their lunch, keeping company . with Kr  a. While taking lunch, each boy
began to manifest different kinds of relations with Kr  a, and they enj oyed
each other's company with j oking words. While thus enjoying lunch With
His friends, Lord Kr  a 's flute was pushed within the belt of His cloth,
and His bugle and cane were pushed in on the left-hand side of His cloth.
He was holding a lump of foodstuff prepared with yogurt, butter, rice
and pieces of fruit salad in His left palm, which could be seen through
His petal-like finger j oints. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
accepts the results of all great sacrifices, was laughing and j oking, enjoying
lunch with His friends in Vrndavana. And thus the scene was being
observed by the demigods from heaven. As for the boys, they were simply
enjoying transcendental bliss in the company of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead.
At that time, the calves that were pasturing nearby entered into the
deep forest, allured by new grasses, and gradually went out of sight.
When the boys saw that the calves were not nearby, they became afraid
for their safety, and they immediately cried out, "Kr  a! " Krwa is the
killer of fear personified . Everyone is afraid of fear personified, but fear
personified is afraid of Kr !la. By crying out the word "Kr  a," the
boys at once transcended the fearful situation. Out of His great affection,
Kr  a did not want His friends to give up their pleasing lunch eng gement
and go searching for the calves. He therefore said, "My dear friends,
you need not interrupt your lunch. Go on enjoying. I am going per
sonally where the calves are." Thus Lord Kr  a immediately started
to search out the calves in the caves and bushes. He searched in the
88 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
mountain holes and in the forests, but nowhere could He find them.
At the time when Aghasura was killed and the demigods were looking
on the incident with great surprise, Brahma, who was born out of the
lotus flower growing out of the navel of Vi  u, also came to see. He was
surprised how a little boy like Kr !la could act so wonderfully. Although
he was informed that the little cowherd boy was the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, he wanted to see more glorified pastimes of the Lord, and
thus he stole all the calves and cowherd boys and took them to a different
place. Lord Krwa, therefore, in spite of searching for the calves, could not
find them, and He even lost His boy friends on the bank of the Yamuna
where they had been taking their lunch. In the form of a cowherd boy,
Lord Krwa was very little in comparison to Brahma, but because He is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, He could immediately understand that
all the calves and boys had been stolen by Brahma. Kr l!a thought,
"Brahma has taken away all the boys and calves. How can I alone return
to Vrndavana? The mothers will be aggrieved ! "
Therefore in order t o satisfy the mothers o f His friends as well as to
convince Brahma of the supremacy of the Personality of G odhead, He
immediately expanded Himself as the cowherd boys and calves. In the
Vedas it is said that the Supreme Personality ofGodhead expands Himself
in so many living entities by His energy. Therefore it was not very
difficult for Him to expand Himself again into so many boys and calves.
He expanded Himself to become exactly like the boys, who were of all
different features, facial and bodily construction, and who were different
in their clothing and ornaments and in their behavior and personal
activities. In other words, everyone has different tastes; being individual
soul, each person has entirely different activities and behavior. Yet Kr l!a
exactly expanded Himself into all the different positions of the individual
boys. He also became the calves, who were also of different sizes, colors,
activities, etc. This was possible because everything is an expansion of
Kr pa's energy. In the Vi§ru Puriira it is said, parasya brahmarafl- sakti.
Whatever we actually see in the cosmic manifestation-be it matter or the
activities of the living entities-is simply an expansion of the energies of
the Lord, as heat and light are the different expansions of fire.
Thus expanding Himself as the boys and calves in their individual
capacities, and surrounded by such expansions of Himself, Kr  a entered
the village of Vrndavana. The residents had no knowledge of what had
happened. After entering the village, V rndavana, all the calves entered
their respective cowsheds, and the boys also went to their respective
mothers and homes.
The great sage Narada Muni . (p. 67)

The family priest, Gargamuni, performed the name-giving ceremony when Kr  a was one
year old. (p. 56)

Y a8oda and Rohi¢ would call all their neighboring friends to see the fun. (p. 59)

The darling of Vraja. (p. 6 1 )
Kr  a had to plan how to stop the destruction of His intimate friends. (p. 83)
The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by Brahma 89
The mothers of the boys heard the vibration of their flutes b efore
their entrance , and to receive them, they came out of their homes and
embraced them. And out of maternal affection, milk was flowing from
their breasts, and they allowed the boys to drink it. However, their
offering was not exactly to their boys but to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead who had expanded Himself into such boys. This was another
chance for all the mothers of Vrndavana to feed the Supreme Personality
of Godhead with their own mille Therefore Lord Kr  a gave not only
Y asoda the chance of feeding Him, but this time He gave the chance to
all the elderly gopis.
All the boys began to deal with their mothers as usual, and the mothers
also , on the approach of evening, b egan to b athe their respective children,
decorate them with tilaka and ornaments and give them necessary food
after the day's labor. The cows also , who were away in the pasturing
ground, returned in the evening and b egan to call their respective calves.
The calves immediately came to their m others, and the mothers began to
lick the bodies of the calves. These relations between the cows and the
gopis with their calves and boys remained unchanged, although actually the
original calves and boys were not there. Actually the cows' affection for
their calves and the elderly gopis ' affection for the boys causelessly in
creased . Their affection increased naturally, even though . the calves and
boys were not their offspring. Although the cows and elderly gopis of
V rndavana had greater affection for Kr  a than for their own offspring,
after this incident , their affection for their offspring increased exactly as it
did for Kr  a. For one year continually, Kr  a Himself expanded as the
calves and cowherd b oys and was present in the pasturing ground.
As it is stated in the Bhagavad-gitii, Kr  a's expansion is situated in
everyone's heart as the Su persoul. Similarly, instead of expanding Himself
as the Supersoul, He expanded Himself as a portion of calves and cowherd
boys for one continuous year.
One day, when Kr  a, along with Balarama, was maintaining the calves
in the forest , They saw some cows grazing on the top of Govardhana Hill.
The cows could see down into the valley where the calves were being
taken care of by the boys. Suddenly, on sighting their calves, the cows
began to run towards them. They leaped downhill with j oined front and
rear legs. The cows were so melted with affection for their calves that they
did not care about the rough path from the top of Govardhana Hill down
to the pasturing ground. They began to approach the calves with their
milk b ags full of milk, and they raised their tails upwards. When they were
coming down the hill, their milk b ags were pouring milk on the ground
90 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
out of intense maternal affection for the calves, although they were not
their own calves. These cows had their own calves, and the calves that
were grazing beneath Govardhana Hill were larger; they were not expected
to drink milk directly from the milk bag but were satisfied with the grass.
Yet all the cows came immediately and began to lick their bodies, 2nd the
calves also b gan to suck milk from the milk bags. There appeared to be a
great bondage of affection between the ·cows and calves.
When the cows were running down from the top of Govardhana Hill,
the men who were taking care of them tried to stop them. Elderly cows
are taken care of by the men, and the calves are taken care of by the boys;
and as far as possible, the calves are kept separate from the cows, so that
the calves do not drink all the available mille Therefore the men who were
taking care of the cows on the top of Govardhana Hill tried to stop them,
but they failed . Baffled by their failure, they were feeling ashamed and
angry. They were very unhappy, but when they came down and saw their
children taking care of the calves, they all of a sudden became very
affectionate toward the children. It was very astonishing. Although the
men came down disappointed, baffled and angry, as soon as they saw their
own children, their hearts melted with great affection. At once their anger,
dissatisfaction and unhappiness disappeared. They began to show paternal
love for the children, and with great affection they lifted them in their
arms and embraced them. They began to smell their children's heads and
enjoy their company with great happiness. After embracing their children,
the men again took the cows back to the top of Govardhana Hill. Along
the way they began to think of their children, and affectionate tears fell
from their eyes.
When Balarama saw this extraordinary exchange of affection between
the cows and their calves and between the fathers and their children-when
neither the calves nor the children needed so much care-He began to
wonder why this extraordinary thing happened. He was astonished to see
all the residents of V rndavana so affectionate for their own children,
exactly as they had been for Kr J)a. Similarly, the cows had grown affec
tionate for their calves-as much as for Krsna. Balarama therefore con-. . .
eluded that the extraordinary show of affection was something mystical,
either performed by the demigods or by some powerful man. Otherwise,
how could this wonderful change take place? He concluded that this mys
tical change must have been caused by Kr !J.a, whom B alarama considered
His worshipable Personality of Godhead. He thought, "It was arranged by
Kfwa, and even I could not check its mystic power." Thus Balarama
understood that all those boys and calves were only expansions of Kr J)a.
The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by Brahma 9 1
Baladima inquired from Kr§ a about the actual situation. H e said, " My
dear Kr§ a , in the beginning I thought that all these cows, calves and
cowherd boys were either great sages and saintly persons or demigods, but
at the present it appears that they are actually Your expansions. They are
all You ; You Yourself are playing as the calves and cows and boys. What is
the mystery of this situation? Where have those other calves and cows and
boys gone? And why are You expanding Yourself as the cows , calves, and
boys? Will You kindly tell Me what is the cause?" At the request of
Baladima , Kr§ a briefly explained the whole situation : how the calves and
boys were stolen by Brahma and how He was concealing the incident by
expanding Himself so people would not know that the original cows,
calves , and boys were missing . .
While Kr§ a and Balarama were talking, Brahma returned after a mo
ment 's interval (according to the duration of his life). We have information
of Lord Brahma's duration of life fro m the Bhagavad-gitii: 1 ,000 times the
duration of the four ages, or 4,300 ,000 x 1 ,000 , comprise Brahma's
twelve hours. Similarly, one moment of Brahma is equal to one year of
our solar calculation. After one moment of Brahma's calculation, Brahma
came back to see the fun caused by his stealing the boys and calves. But
he was also afraid that he was playing with fire. Kr§ a was his master , and
he had played mischief for fun by taking away His calves and boys. He was
really anxious, so he did not stay away very long ; he came back after a
moment (of his calculation). He saw that all the boys, calves and cows
were playing with Kr§ a in the same way as when he had come upon
them, although he was confident that he had taken them and made them
lie down asleep under the spell of his mystic power. Brahma began to
think , "All the boys, calves and cows were taken away by me, and I know
they are still sleeping. How is it that a similar batch of cows, boys and
calves are playing with Kr§ a? Is it that they are not influenced by my
mystic power? Have they been playing continually for one year with
Kr§ a ? " Brahma tried to understand who they were and how they were
uninfluenced by his mystic power, but he could not ascertain it. In other
words, he himself came under the spell of his own mystic power: The
influence of his mystic power appeared like snow in darkness or the glow
worm in daytime. During the night's darkness, the glow worm can show
some glittering power , and the snow piled up on the top of a hill or on the
ground can shine during the daytime. But at night the snow has no silver
glitter ; nor does the glow worm have any illuminating power during the
daytime. Similarly, when the small mystic power exhibited by Brahma
was before the mystic power of Kr§ a , it was just like snow or the glow
92 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
worm. When a man of small mystic power wants to show potency in the
presence of greater mystic power, he diminishes his own influence; he
does not increase it. Even a great personality like Brahma, when he wanted
to show his mystic power before Kr  a, became ludicrous. Brahma was
thus confused about his own mystic power.
In order to convince Brahma that all those cows, calves and boys were
not the original ones, the cows, calves, and boys who were playing with
Kf l)a transformed into Vi  u forms. Actually, the original ones were
sleeping under the spell of Brahma's mystic power, but the present ones,
seen by Brahma, were all immediate expansions of Kr  la, or Vi pu. Vi pu
is the expansion of Kf l)a, so the Vi§l)U forms appeared before Brahma. All
the Vi l)U forms were of bluish color and dressed in yellow garments; all
of Them had four hands decorated with club , disc, lotus flower and conch
shell. On Their heads were glittering golden j eweled helmets; They were
bedecked with pearls and earrings, and garlanded with beautiful flowers.
On Their chests was the mark of srivatsa; Their arms were decorated with
armlets and other jewelry. Their necks were smooth just like the conch
shell, Their legs were decorated with bells, Their waists decorated with
golden bells, and Their fingers decorated with jeweled rings. Brahma also
saw that upon the whole body of Lord Vi l)U, fresh tulasi buds were
thrown, beginning from His lotus feet up to the top of the head. Another
significant feature of the Vi l)U forms was that all of Them were looking
transcendentally beautiful. Their smiling resembled the moonshine, and
Their glancing resembled the early rising of the sun. Just by Their glancing
They appeared as the creators and maintainers of the modes of ignorance
and passion. Vi l)U represents the mode of goodness, Brahma represents
the mode of passion, and Lord Siva represents the mode of ignorance.
Therefore as maintainer of everything in the cosmic manifestation, V iwu
is also creator and maintainer of Brahma and Lord Siva.
After this manifestation of Lord Vi  m, Brahma saw that many other
Brahmas and Sivas and demigods and even insignificant living entities
down to the ants and very small straws-movable and immovable living
entities-were dancing, surrounding Lord Viwu. Their dancing was ac
companied by various kinds of music, and all of Them were worshiping
Lord Vi l)U. Brahma realized that all those Vi§l)U forms were complete,
beginning from the ar-ima perfection of becoming small like an atom, up
to becoming infinite like the cosmic manifestation. All the mystic powers
of Brahma, Siva, all the demigods and the twenty-four elements of cosmic
manifestation were fully represented in the person of Viwu. By the
influence of Lord Vi l)U, all subordinate mystic powers were engaged in
The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by Brahma 93
His worship. He was being worshiped by time, space, cosmic manifestation,
reformation, desire, activity and the three qualities of material nature.
Lord Viwu, Brahma also realized, is the reservoir of all truth, knowledge
and bliss. He is the combination of three transcendental features, namely
eternity, knowledge, and bliss, and He is the object of worship by the
followers of the Upani§ads. Brahma realized that all the different forms of
cows, boys and calves transformed into Vi§J).U forms were not transformed
by a mysticism of the type that a yogi or a demigod can display by specific
powers invested in him. The cows, calves and boys transformed into Vi§J).U
murtis or Vi§J).U forms were not displays of Vi§J).U maya or Vi§J).U energy,
but were Vi§J).U Himself. The respective qualifications of Vi§J).U and Viwu
maya are just like fire and heat. In the heat there is the qualification of
fire, namely warmth; and yet heat is not fire. The manifestation of the
Vi§J).U forms of the boys, cows and calves was not like the heat, but rather
the fire-they were all actually Vi§J).U. Factually, the qualification of Vi§J).U
is full truth, full knowledge and full bliss. Another example can be given
with material objects, which are reflected in many, many forms. For
example, the sun is reflected in many water pots, but the reflections of
the sun in many pots are not actually the sun. There is no actual heat and
light from the sun in the pot, although it appears as the sun. But the forms
which Kf§J).a assumed were each and every one full V i§J).U. Satyam means
truth, jnanam, full knowledge, and ananda, full bliss.
Transcendental forms of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His
person are so great that the impersonal followers of the Upani§ads cannot
reach the platform of knowledge to understand them. Particularly, the
transcendental forms of the Lord are beyond the reach of the impersonal
ists who can only understand, through the studies of Upani§ads, that the
Absolute Truth is not matter and that the Absolute Truth is not materially
restricted by limited potency. Lord Brahma understood Kf§J).a and His
expansion into Vi§J).U forms and could understand that, due to the expan
sion of energy of the Supreme Lord, everything movable and immovable
within the cosmic manifestation is existing.
When Brahma was thus standing baffled in his limited power and
conscious of his limited activities within the eleven senses, he could at
least realize that he was also a creation of the material energy, just like a
puppet. As a puppet has no independent power to dance but dances
according to the direction of the puppet master, so the demigods and
li\ing entities are all subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
As it is stated in the Caitanya-caritamrta, the only master is Kf§J).a, and
all others are servants. The whole world is under the waves of the material
94 KH a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
spell, and beings are floating like straws in water. So th eir struggle for
existence is continuing. But as soon as one becomes consciom that he is
the eternal servant of the Su preme Personality of Godhead, this miiyii or
illusory struggle for existence is immediately stopped.
Lord Brahma, who has full control over the goddess of learning and who
is considered to be the best authority in Vedic knowledge, was thus
perplexed, being unable to understand the extraordinary power manifested
in the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the mundane world, even a
personality like Brahma is unable to understand the potential mystic
power of the Supreme Lord. Not only did Brahma fail to understand, but
he was perplexed even to see the display which was being manifested by
Kr pa before him.
Kr  a took compassion upon Brahma's inability to see even how He
was displaying the force of Viwu in transferring Himself into cows and
cowherd boys, and thus, while fully manifesting the Vi  u expansion, He
suddenly pulled His curtain of yogamiiyii over the scene. In the Bhagavad
gitii it is said that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is not visible due to
the curtain spread by yogamiiyii. That which covers the reality is mahii
miiyii, or the external energy, which d es not allow a conditioned soul to
understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead beyond the cosmic
manifestation. But the energy which partially manifests the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and partially does not allow one to see, is called
yogamiiyii. Brahma is not an ordinary conditioned soul. He is far, far
superior to all the demigods, and yet he could not comprehend the display
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore Kf l).a willingly stopped
manifesting any further potency. The conditioned soul not only becomes
bewildered, but he is completely unable to understand. The curtain of
yogamiiyii was drawn so that Brahma would not become more and more
perplexed.
When Brahma was relieved from his perplexity, he appeared to be
awakened from an almost dead state, and he began to open his eyes with
great difficulty. Thus he could see the eternal cosmic manifestation with
common eyes. He saw all around him the super-excellent view of Vrnda
vana-full with trees-which is the source of life for all living entities. He
could appreciate the transcendental land ofV rndavana where all the living
entities are transcendental to ordinary nature. In the forest of V rndavana,
even ferocious animals like tigers and others live peacefully along with
the deer and human being. He could understand that, because of the
presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in Vrndavana, that place
is transcendental to all .other places and that there is no lust and greed
The Stealing of the Boys and Calves by Brahma 95
there. Brahma thus found Sri Kr J)a , the Supreme Personality of Godhead ,
playing the part of a small cowherd boy ; he saw that little child with a
lump of food in His left hand , searching out His friends , cows and calves,
just as He was actually doing one year before, after their disappearance.
Immediately Brahma descended from his great swan carrier and fell
down before the Lord just like a golden stick. The word used among the
V ai l)avas for offering respect is dm;u)avat. This word means falling down
like a stick ; one should offer respect to the superior Vai l)ava by falling
down straight , with his body just like a stick. So Brahma fell down before
the Lord just like a stick to offer respect ; and because the complexion of
Brahma is golden, he appeared to be like a golden stick lying down before
Lord Kr J)a. All the four helmets on the heads of Brahma touched the
lotus feet of Kr J)a. Brahma , being very j oyful, began to shed tears,
and he washed the lotus feet of Kr J)a with his tears. Repeatedly he fell
and rose as he recalled the wonderful activities of the Lord. After re
peating obeisances for a1ong time, Brahma stood up and smeared his hands
over his eyes. Seeing the Lord before him , he, trembling, began to offer
prayers with great respect, humility and attention.
Thus e nds the Bhak tivedan ta purport of the Thirteenth Chapter of
Kr J)a, "The Stealing of the Boys and Calves b_y Brah mii . "
14 I Prayers Offered by Lord Brahma
to Lord Krsna• • •
Brahma said , " My dear Lord , You are the only worshipful Supreme
Lord , Personality of Godhead ; therefore I am offering my humble obei
sances and prayers just to please You . Your bodily features are of the
color of clouds filled with water . Y ou are glittt;ring with a silver electric
aura emanating from Your yellow garments .
"Let me offer my respectful repeated obeisances unto the son of
Maharaj a Nanda who is standing before me with conchshell, earrings and
peacock feather on His head. His face is beautiful ; He is wearing a helmet ,
garlanded by forest flowers , and He stands with a morsel of food in His
hand . He is decorated with cane and bugle , and He carries a buffalo horn
and flute. He stands before me with small lotus feet .
"My dear Lord , people · may say that I am the master of all Vedic
knowledge , and I am supposed to be the creator of this universe , but it has
been proved now that I cannot understand Your personality , even though
You are present before me just like a child . You are playing with Your boy
friends , calves and cows , which might imply that You do not even have
sufficient education. You are appearing just like a village boy, carrying
Your food in Your hand and searching for Your calves . And yet there is
so much difference between Your body and mine that I cannot estimate
the potency of Your body . As I have already stated in the Brah ma-sarhhi ii,
Your body is not material. "
In the Brah ma-sarhhitii it is stated that the body of the Lord is all spirit
ual ; there is no difference between the Lord's body and His self. Each limb
of His body can perform the actions of all the others . The Lord can see
with His hands , He can hear with His eyes , He can accept offerings with
His legs and He can create with His mouth .
Brahma continued : "Your appearance as a cowherd child is for the
benefit of the devotees , and although I have committed offenses at Your
96
Prayers Offered by Lord Brahma to Lord Kr  a 97
lotus feet by stealing away Your cows, boys and calves, I can understand
that You have mercy upon me. That is Your transcendental quality; You
are very affectionate toward Your devotees. In spite of Your affection for
me, I cannot estimate the potency of Your bodily activities. It is to be
understood that when I, Lord Brahma, the supreme personality of this
u niverse, cannot estimate the child-like body of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, then what to speak of others? And if I cannot estimate the
spiritual potency of Your child-like body, then what can I understand
about Y our transcendental pastimes? Therefore, as it is said in the
Bhagavad-gttii, anyone who can understand a little of the transcendental
pastimes, appearance and disappearance of the Lord becomes immediately
eligible to enter into the kingdom of God after quitting the material body.
This statement is also confirmed in the Vedas, and it is stated simply: by
understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one can overcome
the chain of repeated birth and death. I therefore recommend that people
should not try to understand You by their speculative knowledge.
"The best process of understanding You is to submissively give up the
speculative process and try to hear about You, either from Yourself as
You have given statements in the Bhagavad-gita and many similar Vedic
literatures, or from a realized devotee who has taken shelter at Your lotus
feet. One has to hear from a devotee without speculation. One does not
even need to change his worldly position; he simply has to hear Your
message. Although You are not understandable by the material senses,
simply by hearing about You, one can gradually conquer the nescience of
misunderstanding. By Your own grace only, You become revealed to a
devotee. You are unconquerable by any other means. Speculative know
ledge without any trace of devotional service is simply a useless waste of
time in the search for You. Devotional service is so important that even a
little attempt can raise one to the highest perfectional platform. One
should not , therefore, neglect this auspicious process of devotional service
and take to the speculative method_ By the speculative method one may
gai!l partial knowledge of Your cosmic manifestation, but it is not possible
to understand You, the origin of everything. The attempt of persons who
are interested only in speculative knowledge is simply wasted labor, like
the labor of a person who attempts to gain something by beating the
empty husk of a rice paddy. A little quantity of paddy can be husked by
the grinding wheel, and one can gain some grains of rice, but if the skin of
the paddy is already beaten by the grinding wheel, there is no further gain
in beating the husk. It is simply useless labor.
"My dear Lord, there are many instances in the history of human
98 Kf J;la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
society where a person, after failing to achieve the transcendental platform,
engaged himself in devotional service with his body, mind and words and
thus attained the highest perfectional state of entering into Your abode.
The processes of understanding You by speculation or mystic meditation
are . all useless without devotional service. One should therefore engage
himself in Your devotional service even in his worldly activities, and one
should always keep himself near You by the process of hearing and
chanting Your transcendental glories. Simply by being attached to hearing
and chanting Your glories, one can attain the highest perfectional stage
and enter into Your kingdom . If a person, therefore, always keeps in
touch with Y ou by hearing and chanting Your glories and offers the results
of his work for Your satisfaction only, he very easily and happily attains
entrance into Your supreme abode. You are realizable by persons who
have cleansed their hearts of all contamination. This cleansing of the heart
is made possible by chanting and hearing the glories of Your Lordship."
The Lord is all-pervading. As it is stated by Lord Kr :pa in theBhagavad
gitii, "Everything is sustained by Me, but at the same time I am not in
everything." Since the Lord is all-pervading, there is nothing existing with
out His knowledge. The all-pervasive nature of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead can never be within the limited knowledge of a living entity ;
therefore, a person who has attained steadiness o f the mind by fixing the
mind on the lotus feet of the Lord is able to understand the Supreme
Lord to some extent. It is the business of the mind to wander over
varied subject matter for sense gratification. Therefore only a person who
engages the senses always in the service of the Lord can control the mind
and be fixed at the lotus feet of the Lord. This concentration of the mind
upon the lotus feet of the Lord is called samiidhi. Until one reaches the
stage of samiidhi, or trance, he cannot understand the nature of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. There may be some philosophers
or scientists who can study the cosmic nature from atom to atom;
they may be so advanced that they can count the atomic composi
tion of the cosmic atmosphere or all the planets and stars in the sky or
even the shining molecular parts of the sun or other stars and luminaries in
the sky. But it is not possible to count the qualities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
As described in the beginning of Vediinta-sutra, the Supreme Person is
the origin of all qualities. He is generally called nirgura. Nirgu[la means
without qualities. Gu[la means quality, and nir means without. But
impersonalists interpret this word nirgu[la as "having no quality." Because
they are unable to estimate the qualities of the Lord in transcendental
Prayers Offered by Lord Brahma to Lord Kr  a 99
realization, they conclude that the Supreme Lord has no qualities. But
that is actually not the position. The real position is that He is the original
source of all qualities. All qualities are emanating constantly from Him.
How, therefore, can a limited person count the qualities of the Lord? One
may estimate the qualities of the Lord for one moment, but the next
moment the qualities are increased; so it is not possible to make an
estimation of the transcendental qualities of the Lord. He is therefore
called nirgur-a. His qualities cannot be estimated.
One should not uselessly labor in mental speculation to estimate the
Lord's qualities. There is no need of adopting the speculative method or
exercising the body to attain mystic yoga perfection. One should simply
understand that the distress and happiness of this body are predestined ;
there is no need to try to avoid the distress of this bodily existence or to
attempt to achieve happiness by different types of exercises. The best
course is to surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead with
body, mind and words and always be engaged in His service. This transcen
dental labor is fruitful, but other attempts to understand the Absolute
Truth are never successful . Therefore an intelligent man does not try to
understand the Supreme Person, Absolute Truth, by speculative or mystic
power. Rather, he engages in devotional service and depends on the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He knows that whatever may happen to
the body is due to his past fruitive activities. If one lives such a simple life
in devotional service, then automatically he can inherit the transcendental
abode of the Lord. Actually , every living entity is part and parcel of the
Supreme Lc-.rd and a son of the Godhead. Each has the natural right to
inherit and share the transcendental pleasures of the Lord, but due to the
contact of matter, conditioned living entities have been practically dis
inherited. If one adopts the simple method of engaging himself in
devotional service, automatieally he becomes eligible to become freed
from the material contamination and elevated to the transcendental
position of associating with the Supreme Lord.
Lord Brahma presented himself to Lord Kn a as the most presumptuous
living creature because he wanted to examine the wonder of His personal
power. He stole the boys and calves of the Lord in order to see how the
Lord would recover them. After his maneuver, Lord Brahma admitted
that his attempt was most presumptuous, for he was attempting to test his
energy before the person of original energy. Coming to his senses, Lord
Brahma saw that although he was a very powerful living creature in the
estimation of all other living creatures within this material world, in
comparison to the power and energy of the Supreme Personality of
1 00 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Godhead, his power was nothing. The scientists of the material world have
discovered wonders such as atomic weapons, and when tested in a city or
insignificant place on this planet, such powerful weapons create so-called
havoc, but if the atomic weapons are tested on the sun, what is their
significance? They are insignificant there. Similarly, Brahma 's stealing the
calves and boys from Sri Kr  a may be a wonderful display of mystic
power, but when Sri Kr  a exhibited His expansive power in so many
calves and boys and maintained them without effort, Brahma could under
stand that his own power was insignificant.
Brahma addressed Lord Krwa as A c_yuta because the Lord is never
forgetful of a little service rendered by His devotee. He is so kind and
affectionate towards His devotees that a little service by them is accepted
by Him as a great deal. Brahma has certainly rendered much service to the
Lord. As the supreme personality in charge of this particular universe , he
is, without a doubt , a faithful servant of Kr  a ; therefore he could appease
Krsna. He asked that the Lord understand him as a subordinate servant. . . .
whose little mistake and impudence might be excused. He admitted that
he was puffed up by his powerful position as Lord Brahma. Because he is
the qualitative incarnation of the mode of passion within this material
world, this was natural for him , and therefore he committed the mistake.
But after all, Lord Kr  a would kindly take compassion upon His sub
ordinate and excuse him for his gross mistake.
Lord Brahma realized his actual position. He is certainly the supreme
teacher of this universe , in charge of the production of material nature
consisting of complete material elements, false ego , sky, air, fire , water
and earth. Such a universe may be gigantic , but it can be measured, just as
we measure our b ody as seven cubits. Generally everyone's personal
bodily measurement is calculated to be seven cubits of his hand. This
particular universe may appear as a very gigantic body, but it is nothing
but the measurement of seven cubits for Lord Brahma. Aside from this
universe , there are unlimited other universes which are outside the juris
diction of this particular Lord Brahma. Just as innumerable · atomic
infinitesimal fragments pass through the holes of a screened window, so
millions and trillions of universes in their seedling form are coming out
from the bodily pores of Maha-Vi  u , and that Maha-Vi  l· is but a part
of the plenary expansion of Kr  a. Under these circumstan(:es, although
Lord Brahma is the supreme creature within this universe , what is his
importance in the presence of Lord Kr  a?
Lord Brahma therefore compared himself to a little child within the
womb of his mother. If the child within the womb plays with his hands
Prayers Offered by Lord Brahma to Lord Kr J}a 101
and legs, and while playing touches the body of the mother, is the mother
offended with the child? Of course she isn't. Similarly, Lord Brahma may
be a very great personality, and yet not only Brahma but everything that
be is existing within the womb of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The Lord's energy is all-pervading; there is no place in the creation where
it is not acting. Everything is existing within the energy of the Lord, so
the Brahma of this universe or the Brahmas of the many other millions and
trillions of universes are existing within the energy of the Lord; therefore
the Lord is considered to be the mother, and everything existing within
the womb of the mother is considered to be the child. And the good
mother is never offended with the child, even if he touches the body of
the mother by kicking his legs.
Lord Brahma then admitted that his birth was from the lotus flower
which blossomed from the navel of NarayaJ}a after the dissolution of the
three worlds, or three planetary systems, known as Bhurloka, Bhuvarloka
and Svarloka. The universe is divided into three divisions, namely Svarga,
Martya and Patala. These three planetary systems are merged into water
at the time of dissolution. At that time Narayaf}a, the plenary portion of
Kr£?!1-a, lies down on the water and gradually a lotus stem grows from His
navel, and from that lotus flower, Brahma is born. It is naturally concluded
that the mother of Brahma is NarayaJ}a. Because the Lord is the resting
place of all the living entities after the dissolution of the universe, He is
called NarayaJ}a. The word nara means the aggregate total of all living
entities, and ayana means the resting place. The form of Garbhodakasayi
Vi9J}U is called NarayaJ}a because He rests Himself on that water. In
addition, He is the resting place of all living creatures. Besides that,
NarayaJ}a is also present in everyone's heart, as it is confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita. In that sense, also, He is Naraya!Ja, as ayana means the
source of knowledge as well as the resting place. It is also confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita that remembrance of the living entity is due to the presence
of the Supersoul within the heart. After changing the body, a living
creature forgets everything of his past life, but because Narayapa the
Supersoul is present within his heart, he is reminded by Him to act
according to his past desire. Lord Brahma wanted to prove that Kr9!1-a is
the original Narayaf}a, that He is the source of Narayaf}a, and that
Narayava is not an exhibition of the external energy, maya, but is an
expansion of spiritual energy. The activities of the external energy or
maya are exhibited after the creation of this cosmic world, and the
original spiritual energy of Narayava was acting before the creation. So the
expansions of Nadiya!la, from Kr9!la to Garbhodakasayi Vi9!m, from
102 Kr t;Ia, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Garbho4akasayi Vi ':lu to K irodakasayi Vi ':lu, and from K irodakasayi
Vi ':lu to everyone's heart, are manifestations of His spiritual energy.
They are not conducted by the material energy; therefore they are not
temporary. Anything conducted by the material energy is temporary, but
everything executed by the spiritual energy is eternal.
Lord Brahma reconfirmed his statement establishing Kr  ta as the
original Naraya a. He said that the gigantic universal body is still resting
on the water known as Garbho daka. He spoke as follows: "This gigantic
body of the universe is another manifestation of Your energy. On account
of His resting on the water, this universal form is also Naraya a, and we
are all within the womb of this Naraya a form. I see Your different
Naraya':la forms everywhere. I can see You on the water, I can feel You
within my heart, and I can also see You before me now. You are the
original Naraya':la.
"My dear Lord, in this incarnation You have proved that You are the
supreme controller of maya. You remain within the cosmic manifestation,
and yet the whole creation is within You. This fact has already been proved
by You when You exhibited the whole universal creation within Your
mouth before Your mother Yasoda. By Your inco nceivable potency of
yogamaya, You can make such things effective without external help .
"My dear Lord Kr ':la, the whole cosmic manifestation that we are
visualizing at present is all within Your body. Yet I am seeing You outside,
and You are also seeing me outside. How can such things happen without
being influenced by Your inconceivable energy?"
Lord Brahma stressed herein that without accepting the inconceivable
energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one cannot explain things
as they are. He continued: "My dear Lord, leaving aside all other things
and just considering today's happenings-what I have seen-are they not
all due to Your inconceivable energies? First of all I saw You alone;
thereafter You expanded Yourself as Your friends, the calves and all the
existence of Vrndavana; then I saw You and all the boys as four-handed
V i  us, and They were being worshiped by all elements and all demigods,
including myself. Again They all became cowherd boys, and You remained
alone as You were before. Does this not mean that You are the Supreme
Lord Naraya':la, the origin of everything, and from You everything
emanates, and again everything enters unto You, and You remain the
same as before?" -
"Persons who are unaware of Your inconceivable energy cannot under
stand that You alone expand Yourself as the creator Brahma, maintainer
Viwu, and annihilator Siva. Persons who are not in awareness of things as
Prayers Offered by Lord Brahm a to Lord Kr  a 103
they are contemplate that I, Brahma, am the creator, Vi !lu is the main
tainer, and Lord Siva is the annihilator. Actually, You are alone everything
-creator, maintainer, and annihilator. Similarly, You expand Yourself in
different incarnations ; among the demigods You incarnate as Vamana
deva, among the great sages You incarnate as Parasurama, among the
human beings You appear as Yourself, as Lord Kf l)-a, or Lord Rama,
among the animals You appear as the boar incarnation , and among the
aquatics You appear as the incarnation of fish. And yet You have no
appearance ; You are always eternal. Your appearance and disappearance
are made possible by Your inconceivable energy just to give protection to
the faithful devotees and to annihilate the demons. 0 my Lord , 0 all
pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, 0 Supersoul, controller of all
mystic powers, no one can appreciate Y our transcendental pastimes as
they are exhibited within these three worlds . No one can estimate how
You have expanded Y our yogamiiyii and Your incarnation and how You
act by Y our transcendental energy. My dear Lord , this whole cosmic
manifestation is just like a flashing dream , and its temporary existence
simply disturbs the mind. As a result, we are full of anxiety in this
existence ; to live within this material world means simply to suffer and
to be full of all miseries. And yet this temporary existence of the material
world appears to be pleasing and dear on account of its having evolved
from Your body, which is eternal and full of bliss and knowledge.
"My conclusion is , therefore, that You are the Supreme Soul, Absolute
Truth, and the supreme original person ; and although You have expanded
Yourself in so many Vi !lu forms, or in living entities and energies , by
Your inconceivable transcendental potencies , You are the supreme one
without a second, You are the supreme Supersoul. The innumerable
living entities are simply like sparks of the original fire. Your Lordship ,
the conception of the Supersoul as impersonal is wrongly accepted be
cause I see that Y ou are the original person. A person with a poor fund of
knowledge may think that , b ecause You are the son of Maharaj a Nanda ,
You are not the original person, that You are born just like a human being.
They are mistaken. You are the actual original person ; that is my con
clusion. In spite of Y our being the son of N anda, Y ou are the original
person , and there is no doubt about it. Y ou are the Absolute Truth, and
Y ou are not of this material darkness. Y ou are the source of the original
brah majyo ti as well as the material luminaries. Your transcendental efful
gence is identical with brah maj_yo ti. As it is described in the Brah ma
sarhhitii, the brahmaj_yo t i is nothing but Your personal bodily effulgence.
There are many Vi !lu incarnations and incarnations of Your different
104 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
qualities, but all those incarnations are not on the same level. You are the
original lamp. Other incarnations may possess the same candle power as
the original lamp, but the original lamp is the beginning of all light. And
because You are not one of the creations of this material world, even after
the annihilation of this world, Your existence as You are will continue.
"Because You are the original person, You are therefore described in
the Gopala-tapani (the Vedic Upani§ad), as well as in the Brahma-samhita,
as govindam adi-puru§am. Govinda is the original person, the cause of all
causes. In the Bhagavad-gita also it is stated that You are the source of the
Brahman effulgence. No one should conclude that Your body is like an
ordinary material body. Your body is ak§ara, indestructible. The material
body is always full of threefold miseries, but Your body is sac-cid
ananda-vigraha : full of being, bliss, knowledge and eternality. You are also
niraiijana because Your pastimes, as the little son of mother Y asoda or the
Lord of the gopis, are never contaminated by the material qualities. And
although You exhibited Y ourself in so many cowherd boys, calves and
cows, Your transcendental potency is not reduced. You are always com'
plete. As it is described in the Vedic literature, even if the complete is
taken away from the complete-Supreme Absolute Truth-it yet remains
the complete, Supreme Absolute Truth. And although many expansions
from the complete are visible, the complete is one without a second. Since
all Your pastimes are spiritual, there is no possibility of their being con
taminated by the material modes of nature. When You place Yourself
subordinate to Your father and mother, Nanda and Yasoda, You are not
reduced in Your potency; this is an expression of Your loving attitude for
Your devotees. There is no other competitor of second identity than Your
self. A person with a poor fund of knowledge concludes that Your pastimes
and appearance are simply material designations. You are transcendental
to both nescience and knowledge, as it is confirme? in the Gopala-tapani.
You are the original amrta (nectar of immortality), indestructible. As it is
confirmed in the Vedas, amrtam sasvatmh brahme. Brahman is the eternal,
the supreme origin of everything, who has no birth or death.
"In the Upani§ads it is stated that the Supreme Brahman is as effulgent
as the sun and is the origin of everything, and anyone who can understand
that original person becomes liberated from the material conditional life.
Anyone who can simply be attached to You by devotional service can
know Your actual position, Your birth, appearance, disappearan ce and
activities. As confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita, simply by understanding
Your constitutional position, appearance and disappearance, one can be
immediately elevated to the spiritual kingdom after quitting this present
Seeing Kmw enj oying with H is cowherd friends, L o rd B r a h m a decided to play a trick .
( p . 8 8 )

Kr !la always demanded mother Yasoda's complete attention. (p. 64)

O u t of the broken , fallen t rees came t w o pe rsonali tic:; , s h i n ing l i kl' l 1 l a z i n g fi re . ( p . 7 1 )

With tumultuous sound they started for V rndavana. (p. 76)
"I am offering my humble obeisances and prayers just to please You." (p. 96)
Prayers Offered by Lord Brahma to Lord Kr  a 105
body. Therefore to cross over the ocean of material nescience, an intelli
gent person takes shelter of Your lotus feet and is easily transferred to the
spiritual world. There are many so-called meditators who do not know
that You are the Supreme Soul. As stated in the Bhagavad-gita, You are the
Supreme Soul present in everyone's heart. Therefore there is no necessity
of one's meditating on so mething beyond You. One who is always
absorbed in meditation on Your original form of K[ l).a easily crosses over
the ocean of material nescience. But persons who do not know that You
are the Supreme Soul remain within this material world in spite of their
s'o-called meditation. If, by the association of Y our devotees, a person
comes to the knowledge that Lord Krwa is the original Supersoul, then it
is possible for him to cross over the ocean of material ignorance. For
instance, a person becomes transcendental to the mistake of thinking a
rope is a snake ; as soon as one understands that the rope is not a snake, he
is liberated from fear. For one who understands You, therefore, through
Your personal teachings, as stated in the Bhagavad-gita, or through Your
pure devotees, as stated in the Srimad-Bhagavatam and all Vedic literatures
-that You are the ultimate goal of understanding-he need no more fear
this material existence.
"So-called liberation and bondage has no meaning for a person who is
already engaged in Y our devotional service, just as a person who knows
that the rope is not a snake is unafraid. A devotee knows that this material
world belongs to Y ou, and he therefore engages everything in Your
transcendental loving service. Thus there is no bondage for him. For a
person who is already situated in the sun planet, there is no question of
the appearance or disappearance of the sun in the name of day or night. It
is also said that Y ou, Kf l).a, are just like the sun, and maya is like darkness.
When the sun is present, there is no question of darkness ; so, for those
who are always in Your presence, there is no question of bondage or
liberation. They are already liberated . On the other hand, persons who
falsely think themselves to be liberated without taking shelter of Your
lotus feet, fall down because their intelligence is not pure.
"If one therefore thinks that the Supersoul is so mething different
from Your personality and thus searches out the Supersoul somewhere
else, in the forest or in the caves of the Himalayas, his condition is very
lamentable.
"Your teachings in the Bhagavad-gita are that one should give up all
other processes of self-realization and simply surrender unto You, for
that is complete. Because Y ou are supreme in everything, those who are
searching after the Brahman effulgence are also searching after You. And
106 Kr  a, the Supreme Perso nality of Godhead
those who are searching after Supersoul realization are also searching after
You. You have stated in the Bhagavad-gita that Y ou Yourself, by Your
partial representation as the Supersoul , have entered into this material cos
mic manifestation. You are present in everyone's heart , and there is no need
to search out the Supersoul anywhere else. If someone does so , he is simply
in ignorance. One who is transcendental to such a position understands
that You are unlimited ; You are both within and without. Your presence
is everywhere. Instead of searching for the Supersoul anywhere else, a
devotee only concentrates his mind on Y ou within. Actually one who is
liberated from the material concept of life can search for Y ou ; others
cannot. The simile of thinking the rope to be a snake is applicable only to
those who are still in ignorance of You. Actually the existence of a snake
besides the rope is only within the mind. The existence of maya, similarly,
is only within the mind . Maya is nothing but ignorance of Your personality.
When one forgets Your personality, that is the conditional state of miiyii.
Therefore one who is fixed u pon You both internally and externally is not
illusioned.
"One who has attained a little devotional service can understand Your
glories. Even one striving for Brahman realization or Paramatma realiza
tion cannot understand the different features of Y our personality unless
he treads the devotional path. One may be the spiritual master of many
impersonalists, or he may go to the forest or to a cave or mountain and
meditate as a hermit for many, many years, but he cannot understand
Your glories without being favored by a slight degree of devotional service .
Brahman realization or Paramatma realization are also not possible even
after one searches for many, many years unless one is touched by the
wonderful effect of devotional service.
" My dear Lord , I pray that I may be so fortunate that, in this life or in
another life, wherever I may take my birth, I may be counted as one of
Your devotees. Wherever I may be, I pray that I may b e engaged in Y our
devotional service. I do not even care what form of life I get in the future,
because I can see that even in the form of cows and calves or cowherd
boys, the devotees are so fortunate to be always engaged in Y our tran
scendental loving service and association. Therefore I wish to be one of
them instead of such an exalted person as I am now , for I am full of
ignorance. The gopis and cows of V rndavana are so fortunate that they
have been able to su pply their breast milk to You. Persons who are
engaged in performing great sacrifices and offering many valuable goats in
the sacrifice cannot attain the perfection of understanding You, but sim
ply by devotional service these innocent village women and cows are all
Prayers Offered b y Lord Brahma to Lord Kr  a 107
able to satisfy You with their milk . You have drunk their milk to satis
faction, yet You are never satisfied by those engaged in performing
sacrifices. I am simply surprised, therefore, with the fortunate position of
Maharaja Nanda, mother Yasoda and the cowherd men and gopis, because
You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, are
existing here as their most intimate lovable object. My dear Lord, no one
can actually appreciate the good fortune of these residents of V rndavana.
We are all demigods, controlling deities of the various senses of the living
entities, and we are proud of enj oying such privileges, but actually there is
no comparison between our position and the position of these fortunate
residents of Vrndavana because they are actually relishing Your presence
and enjoying Your association by dint of their activities. We may be proud
of being controllers of the senses, but here the residents of Vrndavana are
so transcendental that they are not under our control. Actually they are
enjoying the senses through service to You. I shall therefore consider my
self fortunate to be given a chance to take birth in this land of v rndavana
in any of my future lives.
"My dear Lord, I am therefore not interested in either material opulences
or liberation. I am most humbly praying at Your lotus feet for You to
please give me any sort of birth within this Vrndavana forest so that I may
be able to be favored by the dust of the feet of some of the devotees of
Vrndavana. Even if I am given the chance to grow just as the humble grass
in this land, that will be a glorious birth for me. But if I a m not so
fortunate to take birth within the forest of V rndavana, I beg to be allowed
to take birth outside the immediate area of Vrndavana so that when the
devotees go out they will walk over me. Even that would be a great fortune
for me. I am just aspiring for a birth in which I will be smeared by the dust
of the devotees' feet.
"I can see that everyone here is simply full of Kr  a consciousness; they
do not know anything but Mukunda. All the Vedas are indeed searching
after the lotus feet of Kr  a."
It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gitii that the purpose of Vedic knowledge
is to find Kr  a. And it is said in the Brahma-sarhhitii that it is very dif
ficult to find Kr va, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by systematic
reading of the Vedic literature. But He is very easily available through the
mercy of a pure devotee. The pure devotees of V rndavana are fortunate
because they can see Mukunda (Lord Kr !la) all the time. This word
"mukunda" can be understood in two ways. Muk means liberation. Lord
Kr tta can give liberation and therefore transcendenNil bliss. The word
also refers to His smiling face, which is just like the kunda flower. Mukha
1 08 Kr !la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
also means face. The kunda flower is very beautiful, and it appears to be
smiling. Thus the comparison is made.
The difference between the pure devotees of V rndavana and other
devotees is that the residents of Vrndavana have no other desire but to be
associated with Kr  a. Kr !la, being very kind to His devotees, fulfills their
desire ; because they always want Kr  a's association, the Lord is always
prepared to give it to them. The devotees of Vrndavana are also spontane
ous lovers. They do not follow the regulative principles. They are not
required to strictly follow regulative principles because they are already
naturally developed in transcendental love for Kf§p.a. Regulative principles
are required for persons who have not achieved the position of transcen
dental love. Brahma is also a devotee of the Lord, but he is subject to
follow the regulative principles. He prays to Kr§p.a to give him the chance
to take birth in v rndavana so that he might be elevated to the platform of
spontaneous love. ·
Lord Brahma continued : "My Lord, sometimes I am puzzled as to how
Your Lordship will be able to repay, in gratitude, the devotional service
of these residents of V rndavana. Although I know that You are the
supreme source of all benediction, I am puzzled to know how You will be
able to repay all the service that You are receiving from these residents of
Vrndavana. I think of how Y ou are so kind, so magnanimous, that even
Piitana, who came to cheat You by dressing herself as a very affectionate
mother, was awarded liberation and the actual post of a mother. And
other demons belonging to the same family, such as Aghasura and
Bakasura, were also favored with liberation. Under the circumstances, I am
puzzled. These residents of Vrndavana have given You everything-their
bodies, their minds, their love, their homes. Everything is being utilized
for Your purpose. So how will You be able to repay their debt? You have
already given Yourself to Piitana ! I surmise that You shall ever remain a
debtor to the residents of Vrndavana, being unable to repay their loving
service. My Lord, I can understand that the superexcellent service of the
residents of Vrndavana is due to their spontaneously engaging all natural
instincts in Your service. It is said that attachment for material obj ects
and home is due to illl!sion, which makes a living entity conditioned in the
material world. But this is only the case for persons who are not in Kr p.a
consciousness. In the case of the residents of Vrndavana, such obstructions,
as attachment to hearth and home, are nonexistent . Because their attach
ment has been converted unto You, and their home has been converted
into a temple because You are always there, and because they have
forgotten everything for Your sake, there is no impediment . For a Kr p.a
Prayers Offered by Lord Brahma to Lord Kr  a 109
conscious person, there is no such thing as impediments in hearth and
home. Nor is there illusion.
"I can also understand that Your appearance as a small cowherd boy, a
child of the cowherd men, is not at all a material activity. You are so much
obliged by their affection that You are here to enthuse them with more
loving service by Your transcendental presence. In Vrndavana there is no
distinction between material and spiritual because everything is dedicated
to Y our loving service. My dear Lord, Your Vrndavana pastimes are simply
to enthuse Your devotees. If someone takes Your Vrndavana pastimes to
be material, he will be misled.
"My dear Lord Krwa, those who deride You, claiming that You have a
material body like an ordinary man, are described in the Bhagavad-gitii as
demonic and less intelligent. You are always transcendental. The non
devotees are cheated because they consider You to be a material creation.
Actually, You have assumed this body, which resembles that of an ordinary
cowherd boy, simply to increase the devotion and transcendental bliss of
Your devotees.
"My dear Lord, I have nothing to say about people who advertise that
they have already realized God or that by their realization they have
themselves become God. But as far as I am concerned, I admit frankly
that for me it is not possible to realize You by my body, mind or speech.
What can I say about You, or how can I realize You by my senses? I cannot
even think of You perfectly with my mind, which is the master of the
senses. Your qualities, Your activities and Your body cannot be conceived
by any person within this material world. Only by Your mercy can one
understand, to some extent, what You are. My dear Lord, You are the
Supreme Lord of all creation, although I sometimes falsely think that I am
the master of this universe. I may be master of this universe, but there are
innumerable universes, and there are innumerable Brahmas also who
preside over these universes. But actually You are the master of them all.
As the Supersoul in everyone's heart, You know everything. Please, there
fore accept me as Your surrendered servant. I hope that You ·will excuse
me for disturbing You in Your pastimes with Your friends and calves.
Now if You will kindly allow me, I will immediately leave so You can
enjoy .Your friends and calves without my presence.
"My dear Lord Kr tla, Your very name suggests that You are all
attractive. The attraction of the sun and the moon are all due to You. By
the attraction of the sun, You are beautifying the very existence of the
Yadu dynasty. With the attraction of the moon, You are enhancing the
potency of the land, the demigods, the briihmaras, the cows and the
1 10 Kr  a , the Supreme Perso nality of Godhead
oceans. Because of Your supreme attraction, demons like Kamsa and
others are annihilated . Therefore it is my deliberate conclusion that You
are the only worshipable D eity within the creation. Accept my humble
obeisances until the annihilation of this material world . As long as there is
sunshine within this material world , kindly accept my humble obeisances. "
I n this way, Brahma, the master o f this universe, after offering humble
and respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
circumambulating Him three times, was ready to return to his abode
known as Brahmaloka. By His gesture , the Supreme Personality of God
head gave him permission to return. As soon as Brahma left , Lord Sri
Kr§ a immediately appeared as He had on the very day the · cows and
cowherd boys had vanished.
Kr§tta had left His friends on the bank of the Yamuna while they were
engaged in lunch, and although He returned exactly one year later, the
cowherd boys thought that He had return d within a second. That is the
way of Kr§!la 's different energies and activities. It is stated in the Bhagavad
gitii that Kr§ a Himself is residing in everyone's heart , and He causes both
remembrance and forgetfulness. All living entities are controlled by the
supreme energy of the Lord , and sometimes they remember and sometimes
they forget their constitutional position. His friends, being controlled in
such a way, could not understand that for one whole year they were absent
from the Yamuna bank and were under the spell of Brahma's illusion.
When Kf§l)a appeared before the boys, they thought, "Kr§ a has returned
within a minute. " They began to laugh, thinking that Kf§l)a was not willing
to leave their lunchtime company. They 'Jere very jubilant and invited
Him , " D ear friend Kf§l)a, You have come back so quickly ! All right, we
have not as yet begun our lunch, not even taken one morsel of food. So
please come and j oin us and let us eat together. " Kr§tta smiled and accepted
their invitation, and He began to enj oy the lunchtime company of His
friends. While eating, Krwa was thinking, "These boys believe that I have
come back within a second , but they do not know that for the last year I
have been involved with the mystic activities of Lord Brahma. "
After finishing their lunch, Kr§!la and His friends and  alves began to
return to their V raj abhii mi homes. While passing, they enj oyed seeing the
dead carcass of Aghasura in the shape of a gigantic serpent. When Kr§tta
returned home to Vraj abhii mi, He was seen by all the inhabitants of
Vrndavana. He was wearing a peacock feather in His helmet, which was
also decorated with forest flowers. Kr§!la was also garlanded with flowers
and painted with different colored minerals collected from the caves of
Govardhana Hill. Govardhana Hill is always famous for supplying natural
Prayers Offered by Lord Brahma to Lord Kr  a 1 1 1
red dyes, and Krey a and His friends painted their bodies with them. Each
of them had a bugle made of buffalo horn and a stick and a flute, and
each called his respective calves by their particular names. They were so
proud of Krey a's wonderful activities that, while entering the village, they
all sang His glories. All the gopis in Vrndavana saw beautiful Krey!la entering
the village. The hoys composed nice songs describing how they were saved
from being swallowed by the great serpent and how the serpent was killed.
Some described Kr .r;ta as the son of Yasoda, and others as the son of Nanda
Maharaja. "He is so wonderful that He saved us from the clutches of the
great serpent and killed him," they said. But little did they know that one
year had passed since the killing of Aghasura.
In this regard, Maharaja Parik it asked Sukadeva Gosvami how the
inhabitants of Vrndavana suddenly developed so much love for Kreypa,
although Kreypa was not a member of any of their families. Maharaja
Parikeyit enquired, "During the absence of the original cowherd boys, when
Kreypa expanded Himself, why is it that th  boys' parents became more
loving toward Him than toward their own sons? Also, why did the cows
become so loving toward the calves, more than toward their own calves?"
Sukadeva Gosvami told Maharaja Parikeyit that every living entity is
actually most attached to his own self. Outward paraphernalia such as
home, family, friends, country, society, wealth, opulence, reputation, etc.,
are all only secondary in pleasing the living entity. They please only
because they bring pleasure to the self. For this reason, one is self-centered
and is attached to his body and self more than he is to relatives like wife,
children, and friends. If there is some immediate danger to one's own
person, he first of all takes care of himself, then others. That is natural.
That means, more than anything else, he loves his own self. The next im
portant object of affection, after his own self, is his material body. A
person who has no information of the spirit soul is very much attached to
his material body, so much so that even in old age he wants to preserve the
body in so many artificial ways, thinking that his old and broken body can
be saved. Everyone is working hard day and night just to give pleasure to
his own self, under either the bodily or spiritual concept of life. We are
attached to material possessions because they give pleasure to the senses
or to the body. The attachment to the body is there only because the "I,"
the spirit soul, is within the body. Similarly, when one is further advanced,
he knows that the spirit soul is pleasing because it is part and parcel of
Kr pa. Ultimately, it is Kreypa who is pleasing and all-attractive. He is the
Supersoul of everything. And in order to give us this information, Kr  a
descends and tells us that the all-attractive center is He Himself. Without
1 1 2 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
being an expansion of Kr  a, nothing can be attractive.
Whatever is attractive within the cosmic manifestation is due to Kr  a.
Kr  a is therefore the reservoir of all pleasure. The active principle of
everything is Kr  a, and highly elevated transcendentalists see everything
in connection with Him . In the Caitan ya-caritiimrta it is stated that a- .
mahiibhiigavata, or highly advanced devotee , sees Kr  a as the active
principle in all movable and immovable living entities. Therefore he sees
everything within this cosmic manifestation in relation to Krwa. For the
fortunate person who has taken shelter of Kr  a as everything, liberation
is already there. He is no longer in the material world. This is also con
firmed in the Bhagavad-gitii. Whoever is engaged in the devotional service
of Kr  a is already on the b rahma-bh iita or spiritual platform. The very
name Kr  a suggests piety and liberation. Anyone who takes shelter of
the lotus feet of Kr  a enters the boat for crossing over the ocean of
nescience. For him , this vast expansion of the material manifestation
becomes as insignificant as a hoofprint . Kr  a is the center of all great
souls, and He is the shelter of the material worlds.
For one who is on the platform of Kr  a consciousness, V aiku tha, or
the spiritual world , is not far away . He does not live within the material
world where there is dan g er at every step. In this way , Kr  a consciousness
was fully explained by Sukadeva Gosvaml to Maharaj a Parik it. Sukadeva
Gosvami even recited to the king the statements and prayers of Lord
Brahma. These descriptions of Lord Kr  a's pastimes with His cowherd
boys, His eating with them on the bank of the Yamuna and Lord Brahma's
prayers unto Him , are all transcendental subj ect matters. Anyone who
hears, recites or chants them surely gets all his spiritual desires fulfilled.
Thus Kr  a 's childhood appearance, His sporting with Balarama in
v rndavana, was described.
Thus ends the Bha k tivedanta purport of the Fourteen th Chapter of
Kr  a, "Prayers Offered by L o rd Brah mii to L o rd K[$[W. "
15 I Killjng of D henukasura
In this way, Sri Kr !la , along with His elder brother Balarama , passed
the childhood age known as kaumiira and stepped into the age of
paugar4a, from the sixth year up to the tenth. At that time, all the cow
herd men conferred and agreed to give those boys who had passed their
fifth year charge of the cows in the pasturing ground. Given charge of the
cows, Kr !la and Balarama traversed V rndavana, purifying the land with
Their footprints.
Accompanied by the cowherd boys and Balarama , Kr !la brought
forward the cows and played on His flute through the forest of V rndavana ,
which was full of flowers, vegetables, and pasturing grass. The V rndavana
forest was as sanctified as the clear mind of a devotee and was full of bees,
flowers and fruits. There were chirping birds and clear water lakes with
waters that could relieve one of all fatigues .. Sweet flavored breezes blew
always, refreshing the mind and body. Kr !la, with His friends and
Balarama , entered the forest and , seeing the favorable situation, enj oyed
the atmosphere to the fullest extent. Kr !la saw all the trees, overloaded
with fruits and fresh twigs, coming down to touch the ground as if
welcoming Him by touching His lotus feet . He was very pleased by the
behavior of the trees , fruits and flowers, and He began to smile realizing
their desires.
Kr !la then spoke to His elder brother Balarama as follows : "My dear
brother , You are superior to all of us , and Your lotus feet are w orshiped
by the demigods. Just see how these trees, full with fruits, have bent down
to worship Your lotus feet. It appears that they are trying to get out of
the darkness of being obliged to accept the form of trees. Actually, the
trees born .· in the land of V rndavana are not ordinary living entities.
Having held the impersonal point of view in their past lives, they are now
put into this stationary condition of life , but now they have the o pportu-
1 1 3
1 14 KH a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
nity of seeing You in Vrndavana, and they are praying for further
advancement in spiritual life through Your personal association. Generally
the trees are living entities in the modes of darkness. The impersonalist
philosophers are in that darkness, hut they eradicate it by taking full
advantage of Your presence. I think the drones that are buzzing all around
You must have been Your devotees in their past lives. They cannot leave
Your company because no one can he a better, more affectionate master
than You. You are the supreme and original Personality of Godhead, and
the drones are just trying to spread Your glories by chanting every moment.
I think some of them must he great sages, devotees of Your Lordship, and
they are disguising themselves in the form of drones because they are
unable to give up Your company even for a moment. My dear brother,
You are the supreme worshipahle Godhead. Just see how the peacocks in
great ecstasy are dancing before You. The deer, whose behavior is just
like the gopis, are welcoming You with the same affection. And the
cuckoos who are residing in this forest are receiving You with great joy
because they consider that Your appearance is so auspicious in their home.
Even though they are trees and animals, these residents of Vrndavana are
glorifying You. They are prepared to welcome You to their best capacity,
as is the practice of great souls in receiving another great soul at home. As
for the land, it is so pious and fortunate that the footprints of Your lotus
feet are marking its body.
"It is quite natural for these Vrndavana inhabitants to thus receive a
great personality like You. The herbs, creepers and plants are also so
fortunate to touch Your lotus feet. And by Your touching the twigs with
Your hands, these small plants are also made glorious. As for the hills and
the rivers, they too are now glorious because You are glancing at them.
Above all, the damsels of V raja, the gopis, attracted by Your beauty, are
the most glorious, because You embrace them with Your strong arms."
In this way, both Lord Kr l!a and Balarama began to enjoy the residents
of Vrndavana to their full satisfaction, along with the calves and cows on
the hank of the Yamuna. In some places both Kr l!a and Balarama were
accompanied by Their friends. The boys were singing, imitating the
humming sound of the drones and accompanying Kr l!a and Balarama,
who were garlanded with forest flowers. While walking, the boys some
times imitated the quacking sound of the swans in the lakes, or when they
saw the peacocks dancing, they imitated them before Kr J!a. Kr l!a also
moved His neck, imitating the dancing and making His friends laugh.
The cows taken care of by Kr l!a had different names, and Kr l!a
would call them with love. After hearing Kr l!a calling, the cows would
Killing of Dhenukasura 1 1 5
immediately respond by mooing, and the boys would enjoy this exchange
to their hearts' content. They would all imitate the sound vibrations made
by the different kinds of birds, especially the cakoras, peacocks, cuckoo
and bhiiradviijas. Sometimes, when they would see the weaker animals
fleeing out of fear of the sounds of tigers and lions, the boys, along with
Kr pa and Balarama, would imitate the animals and run away with them.
When they felt some fatigue, they would sit down, and Balarama would
put His head on the lap of one of the boys just to take rest, and Kr pa
would immediately come and begin massaging the legs of Balarama. And
sometimes He would take a palm fan and fan the body of Balarama,
causing a pleasing breeze to relieve Him of His fatigue. Other boys would
sometimes dance or sing while Balarama took rest, and sometimes they
would wrestle amongst themselves or jump. When the boys were thus
engaged, Kr pa would immediately join them, and catching their hands,
He would enjoy their company and laugh and praise their activities. When
Kr tta would feel tired and fatigued, He would sometimes take shelter of
the root of a big tree, or the lap of a cowherd boy, and lie down. When
He would lie down with a boy or a root as His pillow, some of the boys
would come and massage His legs, and some would fan His body with a
fan made from leaves. Some of the more talented boys would sing in very
sweet voices to please Him. Thus very soon His fatigue would go away.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kr tta, whose legs are tended by the
goddess of fortune, shared Himself with the cowherd boys as one of them,
expanding His internal potency to appear exactly like a village boy. But
despite His appearing just like a village boy, there were occasions when He
proved Himself to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sometimes
men pose themselves as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and cheat
innocent people, but they can only cheat; they cannot exhibit the potency
of God.
While Kr pa was thus engaged in exhibiting His internal potency along
with the supermost fortunate friends, there occurred another chance for
Him to exhibit the superhuman powers of Godhead. His most intimate
friends Sridama, Subala and Stokakr pa began to address Kr pa and
Balarama with great. love and affection thus: "Dear Balarama, You are
very powerful; Your arms are very strong. Dear Kr pa, You are very
expert in killing all kinds of disturbing demons. Will You kindly note that
just near this place there is a big forest of the name Talavana. This forest
is full of palm trees, and all the trees are filled with fruits. Some are falling
down, and some of them are very ripe even in the trees. It is a very nice
place, but because of a great demon, Dhenukasura, it is very difficult to
1 16 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
go there. No one can reach the trees to collect the fruits. Dear Kr !la and
Balarama, this demon is present there in the form of an ass, and he is
surrounded by similar demon friends who assume the same shape. All of
them are very strong, so it is very difficult to approach this place. Dear
brothers, You are the only persons who can kill such demons. Other than
You, no one can go there for fear of being killed. Not even animals go
there, and no birds are sleeping there; they have all left. One can only
appreciate the sweet aroma that is coming from that place. It appears that
up until now, no one has tasted the sweet fruits there, either on the tree
or on the ground. Dear Kr !J.a, to tell You frankly, we are very attracted
by this sweet aroma. Dear Balarama, let us all go there and enjoy these
fruits. The aroma of the fruits is now spread everywhere. Don't You smell
it from here?''
When Balarama and Kr  a were thus petitioned by Their smiling,
intimate friends, They were inclined to please them, and They began to
proceed towards the forest, surrounded by all Their friends. Immediately
upon entering the Talavana, Balarama began to yank the trees with His
arms, exhibiting the strength of an elephant. Because of this jerking, all
the ripe fruits fell down on the ground. Upon hearing the sound of the
falling fruits, the demon Dhenukasura, who was living there in the form of
an ass, began to approach with great force, shaking the whole field so that
all the trees began to move as if there were an earthquake. The demon
appeared first before Balarama and began to kick His chest with his hind
legs. At first, Balarama did not say anything, but the demon with great
anger began to kick Him again more vehemently. This time Balarama
immediately caught hold of the legs of the ass with one hand and,
wheeling him around, threw him into the treetops. While he was being
wheeled around by Balarama, the demon lost his life. Balarama threw the
demon into the biggest palm tree about, and the demon's body was so
heavy that the palm tree fell upon other trees, and several fell down. It
appeared as if a great hurricane had passed through the forest, and all the
trees were falling down, one after another. This exhibition of extraordinary
strength is not astonishing because Balarama is the Personality of Godhead
known as Ananta Se anaga, who is holding all the planets on the hoods of
His millions of heads. The whole cosmic manifestation is maintained by
Him exactly as two threads hold the weaving of a cloth.
After the demon was thrown into the trees, all the friends and associates
of Dhenukasura immediately assembled and attacked Balarama and Kr pa
with great force. They were determined to retaliate and avenge the death
of their friend. But Kr !la and Balarama began to catch each of the asses
Killing of Dhenukasura 117
by the hind legs and, exactly in the same way, wheel them around. Thus
They killed all of them by throwing them into the palm trees. Because of
the dead bodies of the asses, there was a panoramic scene. It appeared as
if clouds of various colors were assembled in the trees. Hearing of this
great incident, the demigods from the higher planets began to shower
flowers on Kr§z:ta and Balarama and began to beat their drums and offer
devotional prayers.
A few days after the killing of Dhenukasura, people began to come into
the Talavana forest to collect the fruits, and animals began to return with
out fear to feed on the nice grasses grown there. Just by chanting or
hearing these transcendental activities and pastimes of the brothers Kr§z:ta
and Balarama, one can amass pious activities.
When Kr§z:ta, Balarama and Their friends entered the village of Vrnda
vana, They played Their flutes, and the boys praised Their uncommon
activities in the forest. Their faces were decorated with tilaka and smeared
with the dust raised by the cows, and Kr§z:ta's head was decorated with a
peacock feather. Both He and Balarama played Their flutes, and the young
gopis were joyous to see Kr z:ta returning home. All the gopis in Vrndavana
remained very morose on account of Kr§z:ta's absence. All day they were
thinking of Kr§z:ta in the forest or of Him herding cows in the pasture.
When they saw Kr§z:ta returning, all their anxieties were immediately
relieved, and they began to look at His face the way drones hover over the
honey of the lotus flower. When Kr§z:ta entered the village, the young gopis
smiled and laughed. Kr§z:ta, while playing the flute, enjoyed the beautiful
smiling faces of the gopis.
Then Kr§z:ta and Balarama were immediately received by Their affec
tionate mothers, Y asoda and Rohiz:ti, and, according to the time's demands,
they began to fulfill the desires of their affectionate sons. Simultaneously,
the mothers rendered service and bestowed benediction upon their tran
scendental sons. They very nicely took care of their children by bathing
and dressing Them. Krwa was dressed in bluish garments, and Balarama
was dressed in yellowish garments, and They were given all sorts of orna
ments and flower garlands. Being relieved of the fatigue of Their day's work
in the pasturing ground, They looked refreshed and very beautiful.
They were given palatable dishes by Their mothers, and They pleasantly
ate everything. After eating, They were seated nicely on clean bedding,
and the mothers began to sing various songs of Their activities. As soon as
They sat down on the bedding, They very quickly fell fast asleep. In this
way, Kr§z:ta and Balarama used to enjoy V rndavana life as cowherd boys.
Sometimes Kr§z:ta used to go with His boy friends and with Balarama,
118 Kr J?a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and sometimes He used to go alone with His friends to the bank of the
Yamuna and tend the cows. Gradually, the summer season arrived, and
one day, while in the field, the boys and cows. became very thirsty and
began to drink the water of the Yamuna. The river, however, was made
poisonous by the venom of the great serpent knowri as Kaliya.
Because the water was so poisonous, the boys and cows became visibly
affected immediately after drinking. They suddenly fell down on the
ground, apparently dead. Then Krwa, who is the life of all lives, simply
cast His merciful glance over them, and all the boys and cows regained
consciousness and began to look at one another with great astonishment.
They could understand that by drinking the water of Yamuna they had
died and that the merciful glance of Kr  a restored their life. Thus they
appreciated the mystic power of Kr ':la, who is known as Yogesvara, the
master of all mystic yogis.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Fifteenth Chapter of Kr  a,
"Killing of Dhenukiisura. "
16 I Subduing Kaliya
When He understood that the water of the Yam una was being polluted
by the black serpent Kaliya, Lord Kr§!la took action against him and
made him leave the Yamuna and go elsewhere, and thus the water became
purified .
When this story was being narrated by Sukadeva Gosvami, Maharaj a
Parik§it became eager t o hear more about Kr§!la ' s childhood pastimes. H e
inquired from Sukadeva Gosvami how Kf§!la chastised Kaliya , who was
living in the water for many years. Actually, Maharaj a Parik§it was
becoming more and more enthusiastic to hear the transcendental pastimes
of Kr§!la, and his inquiry was made with great interest.
Sukadeva Gosvami narrated the story as follows. Within the River
Yam una there was a great lake, and in that lake the black serpent Kaliya
used to live. Because of his poison, the whole area was so contaminated
that it emanated a poisonous vapor twenty-four hours a day. If a bird
happened to even pass over the spot , he would immediately fall down in
the water and die.
Due to the poisonous effect of the Yamuna's vapors, the trees and
grass near the bank of the Yam una had all dried up. Lord Kr§!la saw the
effect of the great serpent's poison : the whole river that ran before
Vrndavana was now deadly.
Kf§!la, who advented Himself just to kill all undesirable elements in the
world , immediately climbed up in a big k adamba tree on the bank of the
Yamuna. The k adamba is a round yellow flower, generally seen only in the
Vrndavana area. After climbing to the top of the tree, He tightened His
belt cloth, and , flapping His arms j ust like a wrestler, jumped in the midst
of the poisonous lake. The k adamba tree from which Kr§!la had j umped
was the only tree there which was not dead . Some commentators say
that due to touching the lotus feet of Kr§l)a , the tree became immediately
1 19
120 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
alive. In some other Puriirws it is stated that Garu a, the eternal carrier of
Vi§l)U , knew that Kf§l)a would take this action in the future, so he put
some nectar on this tree to preserve it. When Lord Kf§l)a jumped into the
water, the river overflooded its banks, as if something very large had fallen
into it. This exhibition of Kf§l)a's strength is not at all uncommon because
He is the reservoir of all strength.
When Kf§l)a was swimming about, just like a great strong elephant, He
made a tumultuous sound which the great black serpent Kaliya could hear.
The tumult was intolerable for him, and he could understand that this was
an attempt to attack his home. Therefore he immediately came before
Kf§J)a. Kaliya saw that Kf§l)a was indeed worth seeing because His body
was so beautiful and delicate; its color resembled that of a cloud, and His
legs resembled a lotus flower. He was decorated with Srivatsa, jewels and
yellow garments. He was smiling with a beautiful face and was playing in
the River Yamuna with great strength. But in spite of Kf§l)a's beautiful
features, Kaliya felt great anger within his heart, and thus he grabbed
Krwa with his mighty coils. Seeing the incredible way in which Krwa was
enveloped in the coils of the serpent, the affectionate cowherd boys and
inhabitants of Vrndavana immediately became stunned out of fear. They
had dedicated everything to Krwa, their lives, property, affection, activities
-everything was for Krwa-and when they saw Him in that condition,
they became overwhelmed with fear and fell down on the ground. All the
cows, bulls and small calves became overwhelmed with grief, and they
began to look at Him with great anxiety. Out of fear they could only cry
in agony and stand erect on the bank, unable to help their beloved Kf J)a.
While this scene was taking place on the bank of the Yamuna, there were
ill omens manifest. The earth trembled, meteors fell from the sky, and the
bodies of men shivered. All these are indications of great immediate danger.
Observing the inauspicious signs, the cowherd men, including Maharaja
N anda, became very anxious out of fear. At the same time they were
informed that Krwa had gone to the pasturing ground without His elder
brother, Balarama. As soon as Nanda and Yasoda and the cowherd men
heard this news, they became even more anxious. Out of their great
affection for Kr§tta, unaware of the extent of Kr9l!a's potencies, they
became overwhelmed with grief and anxiety because they had nothing
dearer than Kr l!a and because they dedicated their everything-life,
property, affection, mind and activities-to Kf§J)a. Because of their great
attachment for Krwa, they thought, "Today Kr§l!a is surely going to be
vanquished!"
All the inhabitants of Vrndavana came out of the village to see Kf§J)a.
Kr  a brought forward the cows and played on His flute through the forest of
v rndavana. (p. 1 1 3 )

S o m d i m< s the boys w o u l d imi ta t<  the sounds of vari ous a n i m als a n d bi rds . . ( p. 7 7)

Kr  a bifurcate d Bakasura's mouth as easily as a child splits a blade of grass. ( p . 78)

Rd u m i ng h o n H  , 1-\r !Ja a n d B a l a rii m a W! re n  cei V! d by Th!  i r affect i o n a lc m o thers . ( p . 1 1 7)
" We think that this a p parent pu nishment to Kaliya IS actu ally some
benedi ction. " ( p . 1 2 3 )
Subduing Kaliya 1 2 1
ThA assembly consisted o f children, young and old men, women, animals
and all living entities ; they knew that Kr pa was their only means of
sustenance. While this was happening, Balarama , who is the master of all
knowledge , stood there simply smiling. He knew how powerful His
younger brother Kr  la was and that there was no cause for anxiety
when Kr pa was fighting with an ordinary serpent of the material world.
He · did not , therefore , personally take any part in their concern. On
the other hand , all the inhabitants of Vrndavana, being disturbed , be
gan to search out Kr  ta by following the impression of His footprints
on the ground , and thus they moved towards the bank of the Yamuna.
Finally, by following the footprints marked with flag, bow and conch
shell, the inhabitants of Vrndavana arrived at the river bank and saw
that all the cows and boys were weeping to behold Kr !la enwrapped in the
coils of the black serpent . Then they became still more overwhelmed with
grief. While Bal<'irama was smiling to see their lamentation, all the in
habitants of Vraj abhumi merged into the ocean of grief because they
thought that Kr pa was finished . Although the residents of Vrndavana did
not know much about Kr  ta, their love for Him was beyond comparison.
As soon as they saw that Kr !la was in the River Yamuna enveloped by the
serpent Kaliya and that all the boys and cows were lamenting, they simply
began to think of Kr  ta 's friendship , His smiling face, His sweet words and
His dealings with them . Thinking of all these and believing that their Kr§!la
was now within the clutches of Kaliya , they at once felt that the three
worlds had become vacant. Lord C aitanya also said that He was seeing
the three worlds as vacant for want of Kr  ta. This is the highest stage of
Krsna consciousness. Almost all of the inhabitants of V rndavana had the. . . .
highest ecstasy, love for Kr§ ta.
When mother Yasoda arrived , she wanted to enter the River Yamuna,
and being checked , she fainted. Other friends who were equally aggrieved
were shedding tears like torrents of rain or waves of the river, but in order
to bring mother Y asoda to consciousness, they began to speak loudly
about the transcendental pastimes of Krwa. Mother Y asoda remained still,
as if dead , because her consciousness was concentrated on the face of
Krwa. Nanda and all others who dedicated everything, including their
lives, to Kr !la were ready to enter the waters of the Yamuna, but Lord
Balarama checked them because He was in perfect knowledge that there
was no danger.
For two hours Kf§!la remained like an ordinary child gripped in the
coils - of Kaliya , but when He saw that all the inhabitants of Gokula
including His mother and father, the go pis, the boys and the cows-were
122 .Kf J)a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
just on the point of death and that they had no shelter for salvation from
imminent death, Kf J)a immediately freed Himself. He began to expand
His body, and when the serpent tried to hold Him, he felt a great strain.
On account of the strain, his coils slackened, and he had no other alterna
tive but to let loose the Personality of Godhead, Kr IJa, from his grasp.
Kaliya then became very angry, and his great hoods expanded. He ex
haled poisonous fumes from his nostrils, his eyes blazed like fire, and
flames issued from his mouth. '(he great serpent remained still for some
time, looking at Kr IJa. Licking his lips with bifurcated tongues, the serpent
looked at Kr IJa with double hoods, and his eyesight was full of poison.
Krwa immediately pounced upon him, just as Garu a swoops upon a
snake. Thus attacked, Kaliya looked for an opportunity to bite Him, but
Kr IJa moved around him. As Kr IJa and Kaliya moved in a circle, the
serpent gradually became fatigued, and his strength seemed to diminish
considerably. Krwa immediately pressed down the serpent's hoods and
jumped up on them. The Lord's lotus feet became tinged with red from
the rays of the jewels on the snake's hoods. Then He who is the original
artist of all fine arts, such as dancing, began to dance upon the hoods of
the serpent, although they were moving to and fro. Upon seeing this,
denizens from the upper planets began to shower flowers, beat drums,
play different types of flutes and sing various prayers and songs. In this
way, all the denizens of heaven, such as the Gandharvas, Siddhas and
demigods, became very pleased.
While Kr IJa was dancing on his hoods, Kaliya tried to push Him down
with some of his other hoods. Kaliya had about a hundred hoods, but
Kr IJa took control of them. He began to dash Kaliya with His lotus feet,
and this was more than the serpent could bear. Gradually, Kaliya was
reduced to struggling for his very life. He vomited all kinds of refuse and
exhaled fire. While throwing up poisonous material from within, Kaliya
became reduced in his sinful situation. Out of great anger, he began to
struggle for existence and tried to raise one of his hoods to kill the Lord.
The Lord immediately captured that hood and subdued it by kicking it
and dancing on it. It actually appeared as if the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Vi IJU was being worshiped; the poisons emanating from the
mouth of the serpent appeared to be like flower offerings. Kaliya then
began to vomit blood instead of poison; he was completely fatigued . His
whole body appeared to be broken by the kicks of the Lord. Within his
mind, however, he finally began to understand that Kr J)a was the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and he began to surrender unto Him. He realized
that Kr IJa was the Supreme Lord, the master of everything.
Subduing Kaliya 123
The wives of the serpent, known as the Nagapatnis, saw that their
husband was being subdued by the kicking of the Lord, within whose
womb the whole universe remains. Kaliya's wives prepared to worship the
Lord , although, in their haste, their dress, hair and ornaments became
disarrayed. They also surrendered unto the Supreme Lord and began to
pray. They appeared before Him, put forward their offspring and anxiously
offered respectful obeisances, falling down on the hank of the Yamuna.
The Nagapatnis knew that Krwa is the shelter of all surrendered souls, and
they desired to release their husband from the impending danger by
pleasing the Lord with their prayers.
The Nagapatnis began to offer their prayers as follows: "0 dear Lord,
You are equal to everyone. For You there is no distinction between Your
sons, friends or enemies. Therefore the punishment which You have so
kindly offered to Kaliya is exactly befitting. 0 Lord, You have descended
especially for the purpose of annihilating all kinds of disturbing elements
within the world, and because You are the Absolute Truth, there is no
difference between Your mercy and punishment. We think, therefore, that
this apparent punishment to Kaliya is actually some benediction. We
consider that Your punishment is Your great mercy upon us because when
You punish someone it is to he understood that the reactions of his sinful
activities are eradicated. It is already clear that this creature appearing in
the body of a serpent must have been overburdened with all kinds of sin;
otherwise, how could he have the body of a serpent? Your dancing on his
hoods reduces all the sinful results of actions caused by his having this
body of a serpent. It is, therefore, very auspicious that You have become
angry and have punished him in this way. We are very astonished to see
how You have become so pleased with this serpent who evidently per
formed various religious activities in his past lives. Everyone must have
been pleased by his undergoing all kinds of penances and austerities, and
he must have executed universal welfare activities for all living creatures."
The Nagapatnis confirm that one cannot come in contact with Kp rta
without having executed pious activities in devotional service in his pre
vious lives. As Lord Caitanya advised in His Sik§ii§{aka, one has to execute
devotional service by humbly chanting the Hare Krl?rta mantra, thinking
oneself lower than the straw in the street and not expecting honor for
himself hut offering all kinds of honor to others. The Nagapatnis were
astonished that, although Kaliya had the body of a serpent as the result of
grievous sinful activities, at the same time he was in contact with the Lord
to the extent that the Lord's lotus feet were touching his hoods. Certainly
this was not the ordinary result of pious activities. These two contra-
124 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
dictory facts astonished them. Thus they continued to pray: "0 dear
Lord, we are simply astonished to see that he is so fortunate as to have the
the dust of Your lotus feet on his head. This is a fortune sought after by
great saintly persons. Even the goddess of fortune underwent severe
austerities just to have the blessing of the dust of Your lotus feet, so how
is it that Kaliya is so easily getting this dust on his head? We have heard
from authoritative sources that those who are blessed with the dust of
Your lotus feet do not care even for the highest post within the universe,
namely the post of Lord Brahma, or the kingship of heavenly planets, or
the sovereignty of this planet. Nor do such persons desire to rule the
planets above this earth, such as Siddhaloka; nor do they aspire for the
mystic powers achieved by the yoga process. Nor do the pure devotees
aspire for liberation by becoming one with You. My Lord, although he is
born in a species of life which is fostered by the most abominable modes
of material nature, accompanied with the quality of anger, this King of the
serpents has achieved something very, very rare. Living entities who are
wandering within this universe and getting different species of life can very
easily achieve the greatest benediction only by Your mercy."
It is also confirmed in the Caitanya-caritiimrta that the living entities
are wandering within the universe in various species of life, but by the
mercy of Kr IJa and the spiritual master, they can get the seed of devo
tional service, and thus their path of liberation can be cleared.
"We therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto You," the Naga
patnis continued, "our dear Lord, because You are the Supreme Person,
You are living as the Supersoul .within every living entity; although You
are transcendental to the cosmic manifestation, everything is resting in
You. You are the personified indefatigable eternal time. The entire time
force is existing in You, and You are therefore the seer and the embodi
ment of total time in the shape of past, present and future, month, day,
hour, moment-everything. In other words, 0 Lord, You can see perfectly
all the activities happening in every moment, in every hour, in every day,
every year, past, present and future. You are Yourself the universal form,
and yet You are different from this universe. You are simultaneously one
and different from the universe. We therefore offer our respectful obei
sances unto You. You are Yourself the whole universe, and yet You are
the creator of the whole universe. You are the superintendent and main
tainer of this whole universe, and You are its original cause. Although You
are present within this universe by Your three qualitative incarnations,
Brahma, Vi IJU, and Mahesvara, You are transcendental to the material
creation. Although You are the cause of the appearance of all kinds of
Subduing Kaliya 125
living entities-their senses, their lives, their minds, their intelligence-You
are to be realized by Your internal energy. Let us therefore offer our
respectful obeisances unto You, who are unlimited, finer than the finest,
the center of all creation and knower of everything. Different varieties of
philosophical speculators try to reach You. You are the ultimate goal of
all philosophical efforts, and You are actually described by all philosophies
and by different kinds of doctrines. Let us offer our respectful obeisances
unto You, because You are the origin of all scripture and the source of
knowledge. You are the root of all evidences, and You are the Supreme
Person who can bestow upon us the supreme knowledge. You are the
cause of all kinds of desires, and You are the cause of all kinds of satis
faction. You are the Vedas personified. Therefore we offer Y ou our
respectful obeisances.
"Our dear Lord, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kr§ a,
and You are also the supreme enjoyer now appeared as the son of
Vasudeva, who is a manifestation of the pure state of goodness. You
are the predominating Deity of mind and intelligence, Pradyumna and
Aniruddha, and You are the Lord of all Vai§ avas. By Your expansion as
caturvyuha- namely Vasudeva, Sari.kar§a a, Aniruddha and Pradyumna-
. You are the cause of the development of mind and intelligence. By Your
activities only, the living entities become covered by forgetfulness or
discover their real identity. This is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita
(Fifteenth Chapter): the Lord is sitting as the Supersoul in everyone's
heart, and due to His presence the living entity either forgets himself or
revives his original identity. We can partially understand that You are
within our hearts as the witness of all our activities, but it is very difficult
to appreciate Your presence, although every one of us can do so to some
extent. You are the supreme controller of both the material and spiritual
energies; therefore You are the supreme leader, although You are different
from this cosmic manifestation. You are the witness and creator and the
very ingredient of this cosmic manifestation. We therefore offer our
respectful obeisances unto You. Our dear Lord, in the matter of creating
this cosmic manifestation, personally You have nothing to exert ; by
expending Your different kinds of energy-namely the mode of goodness,
the mode of passion and the mode of ignorance-You can create, maintain
and annihilate this cosmic manifestation. As the controller of the entire
time force, You can simply glance over the material energy, create this
universe and energize the different forces of material nature which are
acting different!y in different creatures. No one can estimate, therefore,
how Your activities are going on within this world. Our dear Lord,
126 Krwa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
although You have expanded into the three principal Deities of this
universe-namely Lord Brahma, Lord Vi  u and Lord Siva-for creation,
maintenance and destruction, Your appearance as Lord Vi  u is actually
for the benediction of living creatures. Therefore, for those who are
actually peaceful and who are aspiring after the supreme peace, worship of
Your peaceful appearance as Lord Vi  u is recommended. 0 Lord, we are
submitting our prayers unto You. You can appreciate that this poor
serpent is going to give up his life. You know that for us women our lives
and everything are our husband's; therefore, we are praying unto You that
You kindly excuse Kaliya, our husband, because if this serpent dies, then
we shall be in great difficulty. Looking upon us only, please excuse this
great offender. Our dear Lord, every living creature is Your offspring, and
You maintain everyone. This serpent is also Your offspring, and You can
excuse him although he has offended You, undoubtedly without knowing
Your potency. We are praying that he may be excused for this time. Our
dear Lord, we are offering our loving service unto You because we are all
eternal servitors of Your Lordship. You can order us and ask us to do
whatever You please. Every living being can be relieved from all kinds of
despair if he agrees to abide by Your orders."
After the Nagapatnis submitted their prayers, Lord Kr  a released
Kaliya from his punishment. Kaliya was already unconscious from being
struck by the Lord. Upon regaining consciousness and being released from
the punishment, Kaliya got back his life force and the working power of
his senses. With folded hands, he humbly began to pray to the Supreme
Lord Kr  a: "My dear Lord, I have been born in such a species that by
nature I am angry and envious, being in the darkest region of the mode of
ignorance. Your Lordship knows well that it is very difficult to give up
one's natural instincts, although by such instincts the living creature
transmigrates from one body to another." It is also confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gitii that it is very difficult to get out of the clutches of material
nature, but if anyone surrenders unto the Supreme Personality of God
head, Krwa, the modes of material nature can no longer act on him. "My
dear Lord," Kaliya continued, "You are therefore the original creator of
all kinds of modes of material nature by which the universe is created.
You are the cause of the different kinds of mentality possessed by living
creatures by which they have obtained different varieties of bodies. My
dear Lord, I am born as a serpent ; therefore, by natural instinct, I am very
angry. How is it then possible to give up my acquired nature without Your
mercy? It is very difficult to get out of the clutches of Your maya. By
Your maya we remain enslaved. My dear Lord, kindly excuse me for my
Subduing Kaliya 1 27
inevitable material tendencies. Now Y ou can punish me or save me as You
desire . "
After hearing this , the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was acting
as a small human child , ordered the serpent thus : " Y ou must immediately
leave this place and go to the ocean. Leave without delay. You can take
with you all your offspring, wives and everything that you possess. D on't
pollute the waters of the Y amuna. Let it be drunk by My cows and cow
herd boys without hindrance. " The Lord then declared that the order
given to the Kaliya snake be recited and heard by everyone so that no one
need fear Kaliya any longer.
Anyone who hears the narration of the Kaliya serpent and his punish
ment will need fear no more the envious activities of snakes . The Lord
also declared : "If one takes a bath in the Kaliya lake where My cowherd
boy friends and I have bathed, or if one , fasting for a day, offers oblations
to the forefathers from the water of this lake , he will be relieved from all
kinds of sinful reaction." The Lord also assured Kaliya : " Y ou came here
out of fear of Garu la, who wanted to eat you in the beautiful land by the
ocean. Now, after seeing the marks where I have touched your h ad with
My lotus feet , Garu1a will not disturb you. "
The Lord was pleased with Kaliya and his wives. Immediately after
hearing His order, the wives began to worship Him with great offerings of
nice garments , flowers , garlands, jewels , ornaments, sandal pulp , lotus
flowers , and nice eatable fruits. In this way they pleased the master of
Garu1a, of whom they were very much afraid. Then, obeying the orders
of Lord Kr  a, all of them left the lake within the Y amuna.
Thus ends the Bhak tivedanta purport of the Sixteenth Chapter of Kr  a ,
"Subduing Kaliya. "
1 7 I Extinguishing the Forest Fire
King Parik it , after hearing of the chas tisement of Kaliya , inquired from
Sukadeva Gosvami as to why Kaliya left his beautiful land and why Garu?a
was so antagonistic to him. Sukadeva Gosvami informed the King that the
island known as Nagalaya was inhabited by serpents and that Kaliya was
one of the chief serpents there. Being accustomed to eating snakes, Garu?a
used to come to this island and kill many serpents at his will. Some of
them he actually ate , but some were unnecessarily killed. The reptile
society became so disturbed that their leader, Vasuki , appealed to Lord
Brahma for protection. Lord Brahma . made an arrangement by which
Garu?a would not create a disturbance : on each half-moon day , the rep
tile community would offer a serpent to Garu?a. The serpent was to be
kept underneath a tree as a sacrificial offering to Garu?a. Garu?a was satis
fied with this offering, and therefore he did not disturb any other serpents."-
But gradually, Kaliya took advantage of this situation. H e was un
necessarily puffed up by the volume of his accumulated poison , as well as
by his material power , and he thought , "Why should Garu?a be offered
this sacrifice ? " He then ceased offering any sacrifice ; instead, he himself
ate the offering intended for Garu?a. When Garu?a, the great devotee
carrier of Vi !lu , understood that Kaliya was eating the offered sacrifices,
he became very angry and quickly rushed to the island to kill the offensive
serpent . Kaliya tried to fight Garu?a and faced him with his many hoods
and poisonous sharp teeth. Kaliya attempted to bite him , and Garu?a, the
son of Tark ya , in great anger and with the great force deserving the carrier
of Lord Viwu , struck the body of Kaliya with his effulgent golden wings.
Kaliya , who is also known as Kadrusuta , son of Kadru , immediately fled
to the lake known as Kaliyadaha , underneath the Y amuna River , which
Garu?a could not approach.
Kaliya took shelter within the water of the Yamuna for the following
1 28
Extinguishing the Forest Fire 129
reason. Just as Garu1a went to the island of the Kaliya snake, so he also
used to go to the Yamuna to catch fish to eat. There was, however, a great
yo i known as Saubhari Muni, who used to meditate within the water
there and who was sympathetic with the fish. He asked Garu1a not to
come there and disturb the fish. Although Garu1a was not under anyone's
order, being_the carrier of Lord Vi l)-U, he did not disobey the order of the
great yo i. Instead of staying and eating many fish, he carried off one big
fish, who was their leader. Saubhari Muni_ was sorry that one of the leaders
of the fish was taken away by Garu1a, and thinking of their protection, he
cursed Garu1a in the following words : "Henceforward from this day, if
Garu1a comes here to catch fish, then-I say this with all my strength-he
will be immediately killed."
This curse was known only to Kaliya. Kaliya was, therefore, confident
that Garu1a would-not be able to come there, and so he thought it wise to
take shelter of the lake within the Y amuna. But Kaliya's taking shelter of
Saubhari Muni was not successful; he was driven away from the Yamuna
by Kr l)-a, the master of Garu1a. It may be noted that Garu1a is directly
related to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is so powerful that he
is never subjected to anyone's order or curse. Actually the cursing of
Garu1a-who is stated in the Srimad-Bhiigavatam to be of the stature of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavan-was an offense on the
part of Saubhari Muni. Although Garw;la did not try to retaliate, the
Muni was not saved from his offensive act against a great Vai rtava
personality. D ue to this offence, Saubhari fell down from his yogic
position and afterwards became a householder, a sense enjoyer in the
material world. The falldown of Saubhari Muni, who was supposed to be
absorbed in spiritual bliss by meditation, is an instruction to the offender
of Vai l)-avas.
When Kr {la finally came out of Kaliya's lake, He was seen by all His
friends and relatives on the bank of Yam una. He appeared before them
nicely decorated, smeared all over with candana pulp, bedecked with
valuable jewels and stones, and almost completely covered with gold. The
inhabitants of Vrndavana, cowherd boys and men, mother Yasoda, Maha
raja Nanda and all the cows and calves, saw Kr l)-a coming from the
Yam una, and it was as though they had recovered their very life. When a
person regains his life, naturally he becomes absorbed in pleasure and
joyfulness. They each in turn pressed Kr {la to their chests, and thus they
felt a great relief . .Mother Y asoda, Rohi{li, Maharaja Nanda and the cow
herd men became so happy that they embraced Kr {la and thought they
had achieved their ultimate goal of life.
130 Kr !la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Balarama also embraced Krwa, but He was laughing because He had
known what would happen to Kr va when everyone else was so over
whelmed with anxiety. All the trees on the bank of the Yamuna, all the
cows, bulls and calves were full of pleasure because of Krwa's appearance
there. The briihmarw inhabitants of Vrndavana, along, with their wives,
immediately came to congratulate Kr va and His family members. Briih
mar-as are considered to be the spiritual masters of society. They offered
their blessings 'to Kr va and the family on account of Kr va's release_ They
also asked Maharaja Nanda to give them some charity on that occasion_
Being so pleased by Kr va's return, Maharaja Nanda began to give many
cows and much gold in charity to the b riihmar-as. While Nanda Maharaja
was thus engaged, mother Y asoda simply embraced Kr va and made Him
sit on her lap while she shed tears continually.
Since it was almost night, and all the inhabitants of Vrndavana, including
the cows and calves, were very tired, they decided to take their rest on the
river bank In the middle of the night, while they were taking rest, there
was suddenly a great forest fire, and it quickly appeared that the fire
would soon devour all the inhabitants of V rndavana. As soon as they felt
the warmth of the fire, they immediately took shelter of Krwa, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, although He was playing just like their
child. They began to say, "Our dear Kr  a! 0 Supreme Personality of
Godhead! Our dear Balarama, the reservoir of all strength! Please try to
save us from this all devouring and devastating fire. We have no other
shelter than You. This devastating fire will swallow us all!" Thus they
prayed to Kr  a, saying that they could not take any shelter other
than His lotus feet. Lord Krwa, being compassionate upon His own
townspeople, immediately swallowed up the whole forest fire and saved
them. This was not impossible for Kr va because He is unlimited_ He has
unlimited power to do anything He desires.
'
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Seventeenth Chapter of
Kr va, "Extinguishing the Forest Fire . "
18 I Killing the Demon Pralambasura
After extinguishing the devastating fire , Kr  a, surrounded by His
relatives, friends, cows, calves and bulls and glorified by their singing,
again entered Vrndavana , which is always full of cows. While Kr  a and
Balarama were enjoying life in V rndavana , in the midst of the cowherd
boys and girls, the season gradually changed to summer. The summer
season in India is not very much welcomed because of the excessive heat ,
but in Vrndavana everyone was pleased because summer there appeared
just like spring. This was possible only because Lord Kr . a and Balarama ,
who are the controllers even of Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, were residing
there . In Vrndavana there are many falls which are always pouring water,
and the sound is so sweet that it covers the sound of the crickets. And
because water flows all over, the forest always looks very green and
beautiful.
The inhabitants of Vrndavana were never disturbed by the scorching
heat of the sun or the high summer temperatures. The lakes of Vrndavana
are surrounded by green grasses, and various kinds of lotus flowers bloom
there , such as the k alhiira-kaiijo tpala, and the air blowing in v rndavana
carries the aromatic pollen of those lotus flowers. When the particles of
water from the waves of the Yamuna , the lakes and the waterfalls, touched
the bodies of the inhabitants of Vrndavana , they automatically felt a
cooling effect. Therefore they were practically undisturbed by the summer
season.
Vrndavana is such a nice place. Flowers are always blooming, and there
are even various kinds of decorated deer. Birds are chirping, peacocks are
crowing and dancing, and bees are humming. The cuckoos there sing
nicely in five kinds of tunes.
Kr  a, the reservoir of pleasure , blowing His flute , accompanied by His
elder brother Balarama and other cowherd boys and cows , entered the
1 3 1
132 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
beautiful forest of Vrndavana to enjoy the atmosphere. They walked into
the midst of newly grown leaves of trees whose flowers resembled peacock
feathers. They were garlanded by those flowers and decorated with saffron
chalk. Sometimes they were dancing and singing and sometimes wrestling
with one another. While Kr  a danced, some of the cowherd boys 'sang,
and others played on flutes; some bugled on buffalo horns or clapped
their hands, praising Kr  a, "Dear brother, You are dancing very nicely."
Actually, all these boys were demigods descended from higher planets to
assist Kr  a in His pastimes. The demigods garbed in the dress of the
cowherd boys were encouraging Kr  a in His dancing, just as one artist
encourages another with praise. Up to that time, neither Balarama nor
Kr  la had undergone the haircutting ceremony; therefore Their hair was
clustered like crows' feathers. They were always playing hide-and-seek
with Their boy friends or jumping or fighting with one another. Some
times, while His friends were chanting and dancing, Kr  a would praise
them, "My dear friends, you are dancing and singing very nicely." The
boys played at catching ball with bell shaped fruits and round iimalaki.
They played blind man's buff, challenging and touching one another.
Sometimes they imitated the forest deer and various kinds of birds. They
joked with one another by imitating croaking frogs, and they enjoyed
swinging underneath the trees. Sometimes they would play like a king and
his subjects amongst themselves. In this way, Balarama and Krwa, along
with all Their friends, played all kinds of sports and enjoyed the soothing
atmosphere of Vrndavana, full of rivers, lakes, rivulets, fine trees and
excellent fruits and flowers.
Once while they were engaged in their transcendental pastimes, a great
demon of the name Pralambasura entered their company, desiring to
kidnap both Balarama and Kr rta. Although Kr rta was playing the part of
a cowherd boy, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead He could under
stand everything-past, present and future. So when Pralambasura entered
their company, Kr rta began to think how to kill the demon, but externally
He received him as a friend. "0 My dear friend," He said. ''It is very good
that you have come to take part in our pastimes." Krwa then called all
His friends and ordered them: "Now we shall play in pairs. We shall
challenge one another in pairs." With this proposal, all the boys assembled
together. Some of them took the side of Kr va, and some of them took
the side of Balarama, and they arranged to play in duel. The defeated
members in duel fighting had to carry the victorious members on their
backs. They began playing, and at the same time tended the cows as they
proceeded through the Bhandiravana forest. The party of Balarama,
Killing the Demon Pralambasura 133
accompanied by Sridama and Vnabha, came out victorious, and Kr9!la's
party had to carry them on their backs through the Bha!l-9-iravana forest.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kr !la, being defeated, had to carry
Sridama on His back, and Bhadrasena carried v r abha. Imitating their play'
Pralambasura, who appeared there as a cowherd boy, carried Balarama on
his back. Pralambasura was the greatest of the demons, and he had cal
culated that Kr !la was the most powerful of the cowherd boys.
In ·order to avoid the company of Kr !la, Pralambasura carried Balarama
far away. The demon was undoubtedly very strong and powerful, but he
was carrying Balarama, who is compared with a mountain; therefore he
began to feel the burden, and thus he assumed his real form. When he
appeared in his real feature, he was decorated with a golden helmet an4
earrings and looked just like a cloud with lightning carrying the moon.
Balarama observed the demon's body expanding up to the limits of the
clouds, his eyes dazzling like blazing fire and his mouth flashing with
sharpened teeth. At first, Balarama was surprised by the demon's ap
pearance, and He began to wonder, "How is it that all of a sudden this
carrier has changed in every way?" But with a clear mind He could quickly
understand that He was being carried away from His friends by a demon
who intended to kill Him. Immediately He struck the head of the demon
with His strong fist, just as the king of the heavenly planets strikes a
mountain with his thunderbolt. Being stricken by the fist of Balarama, the
demon fell down dead, just like a snake with a smashed head, and blood
poured from his mouth. When the demon fell, he made a tremendous
sound, and it sounded as if a great hill were falling upon being struck by
the thunderbolt of King Indra. All the boys then rushed to the spot. Being
astonished by the ghastly scene, they began to praise Balarama with the
words, "Well done, well done." All of them then began to embrace
Balarama with great affection, thinking that He had returned from death,
and they offered their blessings and congratulations. All the demigods in
the heavenly planets became very satisfied and showered flowers on the
transcendental body of Balarama, and they also offered their blessings and
congratulations for His having killed the great demon Pralambasuta.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Eighteenth Chapter of
Kr !la, "Killing the Demon Pralambiisura. "
1 9 I Devouring the Forest Fire
While Kr pa and Balarama and Their friends were engaged in the
pastimes described above, the cows, being unobserved, began to wander
off on their own, entering farther and farther into the deepest part of the
forest , allured by fresh grasses. The goats , cows and buffalo travelled from
one forest to another and entered the forest known as lsikatavi. This. .
forest was full of green grass, and therefore they were allured ; but when
they entered , they saw that there was a forest fire , and they began to cry.
On the other side, Balarama and Kr pa , along with Their friends, could
not find their animals, and they became very aggrieved . They began to
trace the cows by following their footprints, as well as the path of eaten
grass. All of the boys were fearing that their very means of livelihood, the
cows, were now lost . Soon, however, they heard the crying of their cows.
Kr pa began to call the cows by their respective names , with great noise.
Upon hearing Krwa calling, the cows immediately replied with j oy. But
by this time the forest fire surrounded all of them, and the situation
appeared to be very fearful. The flames increased as the wind blew very
quickly, and it appeared that everything movable and immovable would be
devoured. All the cows and the boys became very frightened , and they
looked towards Balarama the way a dying man looks at the picture of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. They said, " Dear Kr pa and Balarama ,
we are now burning from the heat of this blazing fire . Let us take shelter
of Your lotus feet. We know Y ou can protect us from this great danger.
Our dear friend Kr pa, we are Y our intimate friends. It is not right that we
should suffer in this way. We are all completely dependent on Y ou , and
Y ou are the knower of all religious life. We do not know anyone except
you . "
The Personality of Godhead heard the appealing voices of H is friends,
and casting a pleasing glance over them, He began to answer. B y speaking
1 34
Devouring the Forest Fire 1 35
through His eyes, He impressed His friends that there was no cause for
fear. Then Kr !J.a, the supreme mystic, the powerful Personality of
Godhead , immediately swallowed u p all the flames of the fire . The cows
and boys were thus saved from imminent danger. Out of fear, the boys
were almost unconscious, but when they regained their consciousness and
o pened their eyes, they saw that they were again in the forest with Kr !J.a,
Balarama and the cows. They were astonished to see that they were
completely free from the attack of the blazing fire and that the cows were
saved. They secretly thought that Kr !la must not be an ordinary boy, but
some demigod.
In the evening, Kr !la and Balarama, along with the b oys and cows, re
turned to Vrndavana, playing Their flutes. As they approached the village,
all the gopis became very j oyous. Throughout the day the gopis used to
think of Kr !la while He was in the forest, and in His absence they were
considering one moment to be like twelve years.
Thus ends the Bhak tivedanla purport of the Nineteenth Chapter of
Kr !J.a, "Devouring the Fore st Fire. "
I '
20 I Description of Autumn
The killing of Pralambasura and the devouring of the devastating forest
fire by Kr l!a and Balarama became household topics in Vrndavana. The
cowherd men described these wonderful activities to their wives and to
everyone else, and all were struck with wonder. They concluded that
Kr l!a and Balarama were demigods who had kindly come to V rndavana
to become their children. In this way , the rainy season ensued . In India,
after the scorching heat' of the summer , the rainy season is very welcome.
The clouds accumulating in the sky , covering the sun and the moon,
become very pleasing to the people, and they expect rainfall at every
moment. After su mmer , the advent of the rainy season is considered to be
a life-giving source for everyone. The thunder and occasional lightning are
also pleasurable to the people.
The symptoms of the rainy season may be compared to the symptoms
of the living entities who are covered by the three modes of material
nature. The unlimited sky is like the Supreme Brahman, and the tiny
living entities are like the covered sky , or Brahman covered by the three
modes of material nature. Originally, everyone is part and parcel of
Brahman. The Supreme Brahman , or the unlimited sky , can never be
covered by a cloud , but a portion of it can be covered. As stated in the
Bhagavad-gitii, the living entities are part and parcel of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. But they are only an insignificant portion· of the
Supreme Lord. This portion is covered by the modes of material nature,
and therefore the living entities are residing within this material world . The
brah majyoti-spiritual effulgence-is just like the sunshine ; as the sunshine
is full of molecular shining particles, so the b rah majyoti is full of minute
portions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead . Out of that unlimited
expansion of minute portions of the Supreme Lord , some are covered by
the influence of material nature, whereas others are free.
1 36
Description of Autumn 137
Clouds are accumulated water drawn from the land by the sunshine.
Continually for eight months the sun evaporates all kinds of water from
the surface of the globe, and this water is accumulated in the shape of
clouds, which are distributed as water when there is need. Similarly, a
government exacts various taxes from the citizens which the citizens are
able to pay by their different material activities: agriculture, trade and
industry; thus the government can also exact taxes in the form of income
tax and sales tax. This is compared to the sun drawing water from the
earth. When there is again need of water on the surface of the globe, the
same sunshine converts the water into clouds and distributes it all over the
globe. Similarly, the taxes collected by the government must be dis
tributed to the people again, as educational work, public work, sanitary
work, etc. This is very essential for a good government. The government
should not simply exact tax for useless squandering; the tax collection
should be utilized for the public welfare of the state.
During the rainy season, there are strong winds blustering all over the
country and carrying clouds from one place to another to distribute water.
When water is urgently needed after the summer season, the clouds are
just like a rich man who, in times of need, distributes his money even by
exhausting his whole treasury. So the clouds exhaust themselves by
distributing water all over the surface of the globe.
When Maharaja Dasaratha, the father of Lord Ramacandra, used to
fight with his enemies, it was said that he approached them just like a
farmer uprooting unnecessary plants and trees. And when there was need
of giving charity, he used to distribute money exactly as the cloud
distributes rain. The distribution of rain by clouds is so sumptuous that
it is compared to the distribution of wealth by a great, munificent person.
The clouds' downpour is so sufficient that the rains even fall on rocks and
hills and on the oceans and seas where there is no need for water. It is
like a charitable person who opens his treasury for distribution and who
does not discriminate whether the charity is needed or not. He gives in
charity openhanded.
Before the rainfall, the whole surface of the globe becomes almost
depleted of all kinds of energies and appears very lean. After the rainfal1,
the whole surface of the earth becomes green with vegetation and appears
to be very healthy and strong. Here, a comparison is made with the person
undergoing austerities for fulfillment of a material desire. The flourishing
condition of the earth after a rainy season is compared with the fulfillment
of material desires. Sometimes, when a country is subjected by an un
desirable government, persons and parties undergo severe penances and
138 Kr l)a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
austerities to get control of the government, and when they attain control,
they flourish by giving themselves generous salaries. This also is like the
flourishing of the earth in the rainy season. Actually, one should undergo
severe austerities and penances only to achieve spiritual happiness. In the
Srimad-Bhagavatam it is recommended that tapasa or penance should be
accepted for realizing the Supreme Lord. By accepting austerity in devo
tional service, one regains his spiritual life, and as soon as one regains his
spiritual life, he enjoys unlimited spiritual bliss. But if someone undertakes
austerities and penances for some material gain, it is stated in the Bhagavad
gita that the results are temporary and that they are desired by persons of
less intelligence.
D uring the rainy season, in the evening, there are many glowworms
visible about the tops of trees, hither and thither, and they glitter just like
lights. But the luminaries of the sky, the stars and the moons, are not
visible. Similarly, in the age of Kali, persons who are atheists or miscreants
become very prominently visible, whereas persons who are actually fol
lowing the Vedic principles for spiritual emancipation are practically
obscured. This age, Kaliyuga, is compared to the cloudy season of the
living entities. In this age, real knowledge is covered by the influence of
material advancement of civilization. The cheap mental speculators,
atheists and manufacturers of so-called religious principles become promi
nent like the glowworms, whereas persons strictly following the Vedic
principles or scriptural injunctions become covered by the clouds of this
age. People should learn to take advantage of the actual luminaries of the
sky, the sun, moon, and stars, instead of the glowworm's light. Actually,
the glowworm cannot give any light in the darkness of night. As clouds
sometimes clear, even in the rainy season, and sometimes the moon, stars
and sun become visible, so even in this Kaliyuga there are sometimes
advantages. The Vedic movement of Lord Caitanya's-the distribution of
chanting the Hare Kr 9a mantra-is heard in this way. People seriously
anxious to find real life should take advantage of this movement instead
of looking toward the light of mental speculators and atheists.
After the first rainfall, when there is a thundering sound in the clouds,
all the frogs begin to croak, like students suddenly engaged in reading their
studies. Students are generally supposed to rise early in the morning. They
do not usually arise of their own accord, however, but only when there is
a bell sounded in the temple or in the cultural institution. By the order of
the spiritual master they immediately rise, and after finishing their morning
duties, they sit down to study the Vedas or chant Vedic mantras. Everyone
is sleeping in the darkness of Kaliyuga, but when there is a great acarya, by
Description of Autumn 139
his calling only, everyone takes to the study of the Vedas to acquire actual
knowledge. D uring the rainy season, many small ponds, lakes and rivulets
become filled with water; otherwise the rest of the year they remain dry.
Similarly, materialistic persons are dry, but sometimes, when they are in a
so-called opulent position, with a home or children or a little bank balance,
they appear to be flourishing, but immediately afterwards they beco e dry
agaip, like the small rivulets and ponds. The poet Vidyapati said that in
the society of friends, family , children, wife, etc., there is certainly some
pleasure, but that pleasure is compared to a drop of water in the desert.
Everyone is hankering after happiness, just as• in the desert everyone is
hankering after water. If, in the desert, there is a drop of water, the
water is there of course, but the benefit from that drop of water is very
insignificant. In our materialistic way of life, we are hankering after an
ocean of happiness, but in the form of society, friends and mundane love,
we are getting no more than a drop of water. Our satisfaction is never
achieved, as the small rivulets, lakes and ponds are never filled with water
in the dry season.
Due to rainfall, the grass, trees and vegetation look very green. Some
times the grass is covered by a certain kind of red insect, and when the
green and red combine with umbrella-like mushrooms, the entire scene
changes,just like a person who has suddenly become rich. The farmer then
becomes very happy to see his field full of grains, but the capitalists-who
are always unaware of the activities of a supernatural power-become un
happy bf cause they are afraid of a competitive price. In some places
certain capitalists in government restrict the farmer from producing too
much grains, not knowing the actual fact that all food grains are supplied
by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. According to the Vedic injunc
tion, eko bahiiniim yo vidadhiiti kiimiin, the Supreme Personality of God
head maintains this creation ; therefore, He arranges for a supply of what
ever is required for all living entities. When there is population increase, it is
the business of the Supreme Lord to feed them. But persons who are
atheist  or miscreants do not like abundant production of food grains,
especially if their business might be hampered.
D uring the rainy season, all living entities, in the land, sky and water,
become very refreshed, exactly like one who engages in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord. We have practical experience of this with our
students in the International Society for Krishna Consciousness. Before
becoming students, they were dirty looking, although they had natura ly
beautiful personal features ; but due to having no information of Kr  a
consciousness they appeared very dirty and wretched. Since they have
•-
140 Kf  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
taken to Kr  a consciousness, their health has improved, and by following
the rules and regulations, their bodily luster has increased. When they are
dressed with saffron colored cloth, with tilaka on their foreheads and
beads in their hands and on their necks, they look exactly as if they come
directly from Vaiku  ha.
In 'the rainy season, when the rivers swell and rush to the oceans and
seas, they appear to agitate the ocean. Similarly, if a person who is engaged
in the yoga-mystic process is not very advanced in spiritual life, he can
become agitated by the sex impulse. High mountains, however, although
splashed by torrents of rain, do not change; so a person who is advanced in
Kr  a consciousness, even if put into difficulties, is not embarrassed
because a person who is spiritually advanced accepts any adverse condition
of life as the mercy of the Lord, and thus he is completely eligible to enter
into the spiritual kingdom.
In the rainy season some of the roads are not frequently used, and they
become covered with long grasses. This is exactly like a b riihmal)a who is
not accustomed to studying and practicing the reformatory methods of
Vedic injunctions-he becomes covered with the long grasses of miiyii.
In that condition, forgetful of his constitutional nature, he forgets his
position of eternal servitorship to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
By being deviated by the seasonal overgrowth of long grasses created by
miiyii, a person identifies himself with mayic production and succumbs to
illusion, forgetting his spiritual life.
During the rainy season, lightning appears in one group of clouds and
then immediately in another group of clouds. This phenomena is compared
to a lusty woman who does not fix her mind on one man. A cloud is
compared to a qualified person because it pours rain and gives sustenance
to many people; a man who is qualified similarly gives sustenance to many
living creatures, such as family members or many workers in business.
Unfortunately, his whole life can be disturbed by a wife who divorces him ;
when the husband is disturbed, the whole family is ruined, the children
are dispersed or the business is closed, and everything is effected. It is
therefore recommended that a woman desiring to advance in Krwa
consciousness peacefully live with a husband and that the couple not
separate under any condition. The husband and wife should control sex
indulgence and concentrate their minds on Kr  a consciousness so their
life may be successful. After all, in the material world a man requires a
woman, and a woman requires a man. When they are combined, they
should live peacefully in Kr  a consciousness and should not be re tless
like the lightning, flashing from one group of clouds to another.
Descriptions of Autumn 141
Sometimes, in addition to the roaring thunder of the clouds, there is an
appearance of a rainbow, which stands as a bow without a string. Actually,
a bow is in the curved position, being tied at its two ends by the bowstring;
but in the rainbow there is no such string, and yet it rests in the sky so
beautifully. Similarly, when the Supreme Personality of Godhead descends
to this material world, He appears just like an ordinary human being, but
He is not resting on any material condition. In the Bhagavad-gita, the Lord
says that He appears by His internal potency, which is free from the bond
age of the external potency. What is bondage for the ordinary creature is
freedom for the Personality of Godhead. In the rainy season, the moon
light is covered by clouds but is visible at intervals. It sometimes appears
that the moon is moving with the movement ofthe clouds, but actually the
moon is still; due to the clouds it also appears to move. Similarly, for one
who has identified himself with the moving material world, his actual
spiritual luster is covered by illusion, and with the movement of material
activities, he thinks that he is moving through different spheres of life.
This is due to false ego, which is the demarcation between spiritual and
material existence, just as the moving cloud is the demarcation between
moonlight and darkness. In the rainy season, when the clouds appear for
the first time, after seeing their appearance, the peacocks begin to dance
with joy. This can be compared to persons who are very harassed in the
materialistic way of life . If they can find the association of a person engaged
in the loving devotional service of the Lord, they become enlightened,
just like the peacocks when they dance. We have practical experience
of this, because many of our students were dry and mqrose previous to
their coming to Kr  ta consciousness, but having come into contact with
devotees, they are now dancing like jubilant peacocks.
Plants and creepers grow by drinking water from the ground. Similarly,
a person practicing austerities becomes dry; after the austere performances
are completed and he gets the result, he begins to enjoy life in sense grati
fication, with family, society, love, home and other paraphernalia. Some
times it is seen that cranes and ducks meander continually on the banks of
the lakes and rivers, although the banks are filled with muddy garbage and
thorny creepers. Similarly, persons who are householders without Kr  ta
consciousness are constantly tarrying in material life, in spite of all kinds of
inconveniences. In family life, or any life, one cannot be perfectly happy
without being Kr  a conscious. Srila Narottama dasa Thakur prays that he
will have the association of a person-either a householder or a man in the
renounced order of life-who is engaged in the transcendental loving
service of the Lord and is always crying the holy name of Lord Caitanya.
142 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
For the materialistic person, worldly affairs become too aggressive, whereas
to a person who is in Kr na consciousness, everything appears to be
happily situated.
The barriers around the agricultural field sometimes break due to heavy
torrents of rain. Similarly, the unauthorized atheistic propaganda in the
age of Kali breaks the boundary of the Vedic injunctions. Thus people
gradually degenerate to godlessness. In the rainy season, the clouds, tossed
by the wind, deliver water which is welcomed like nectar. When the Vedic
followers, the b riihmarws, inspire rich men like kings and the wealthy
mercantile community to give charity in the performance of great
sacrifices, the distribution of such wealth is also nectarean. The four
sections of human society, namely the b riihmarws, the k§atriyas, the
vaisyas and the siidras, are meant to live peacefully in a cooperative
mood; this is possible when they are guided by the expert Vedic b riih maras
who perform sacrifices and distribute wealth equally.
Vrndavana forest improved from the rains and was replete with ripened
dates, mangoes, blackberries and other fruits. Lord Kr l)a, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and His boy friends and Lord Balarama, entered
the forest to enjoy the new seasonal atmosphere. The cows, being fed by
new grasses, became very healthy, and their milk bags were all very full.
When Lord Kr l)a called them by name, they immediately came to Him
out of affection, and in their joyful condition the milk flowed from their
bags. Lord K[§l)a was very pleased when passing through the Vrndavana
forest by the side of Govardhana Hill. On the bank of the Yamuna He saw
all the trees decorated with bee hives pouring honey. There were many
waterfalls on Govardhana Hill, and their flowing made a nice sound. K[§l)a
heard them as He looked into the caves of the hill. When the rainy season
was not ended completely but was gradually turning to autumn, sometimes,
especially when there was rainfall within the forest, Krwa and His
companions would sit under a tree or within the caves of Govardhana Hill
and enjoy eating the ripened fruits and talking with great pleasure. When
Krwa and Balarama were in· the forest all day, mother Yasoda used to
send Them some rice mixed with yogurt, fruits and sweetmeat. K[§l)a
would take them and sit on a slab of stone on the bank of the Yamuna.
While K[§l)a and Balarama and Their friends were eating, they watched the
cows, calves and bulls. The cows appeared to be tired from standing with
their heavy milk bags. By sitting and chewing grass, they became happy,
and Kf§l)a was pleased to see them. He was proud to see the beauty of the
forest, which was nothing but the manifestation of His own energy.
At such times Krwa would praise nature's special activities during the
Description of Autumn 143
rainy season. It is stated in the Bhagavad-gita that the material energy, or
nature, is not independent in its actions. Nature is acting under the super
intendence of Kn!la. It is also stated in the Brahma-samhita that material
nature, known as D urga, is acting as the shadow of Kr !la. Whatever order
is sent from Kr rta, material nature obeys. Therefore the natural beauty
created by the rainy season was acted out according to the indications of
Kr ?.p.a. Soon all the water reservoirs became very clean and pleasing, and
refreshing air was blowing everywhere because of the appearance of
autumn. The sky was completely cleared of all clouds, and it recovered its
natural blue color. The blooming lotus flower in the clear water in the
forest appeared like a person who has fallen down from yoga practice but
again has become beautiful by resuming his spiritual life.
Everything becomes naturally beautiful with the appearance of the
autumn season. Similarly, when a materialistic person takes to Kr rta
consciousness and spiritual life, he also becomes as dear as the sky and
water in autumn. The autumn season takes away the rolling of dark clouds
in the sky as well as the polluted water. Filthy conditions on the ground
also become cleansed. Similarly, a person who takes to Kr rta consciousness
immediately becomes cleansed of all dirty things within and without.
Kr rta is therefore known as Hari. "Hari" means "he who takes away."
Kr rta immediately takes away all unclean habits from anyone who takes
to Kr !la consciousness. The clouds of autumn are white, for they do not
carry any water. Similarly, a retired man, being freed from all responsi
bility of family affairs (namely, maintaining the home, wife and children)
and taking complete! y to Kr !la consciousness, becomes freed from all
anxieties and looks as white as clouds in autumn. Sometimes in autumn
the falls come down from the top of the hill to supply clean water, and
sometimes they stop. Similarly, sometimes great saintly persons distribute
clear knowledge, and sometimes they are silent. The small ponds which
were filled with water because of the rainy season, gradually dry up in
autumn. As for the tiny aquatics living in the reservoirs, they cannot under
stand that their numbers are diminishing day by day, as the materially
engrossed persons cannot understand that their duration of life is being
reduced day by day. Such persons are engaged in maintaining cows, pro
perty , children, wife, society and friendship. D ue to the reduced water and
scorching heat from the sun in the autumn season, the small creatures
living in small reservoirs of water are much disturbed; they are exactly like
uncontrolled persons who are always unhappy from being unable to enjoy
life or maintain their family members. The muddy earth gradually dries up,
and newly grown fresh vegetables begin to wither. Similarly, for one who
144 Kr va, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
has taken to Krwa consciousness, desire for family enjoyment gradually
dries up.
Because of the appearance of the autumn season, the water of the ocean
becomes calm and quiet, just as a person developed in self-realization is no
longer disturbed by the three modes of material nature. In autumn, farmers
save the water within the fields by building strong walls so that the water
contained within the field cannot run out. There is hardly any hope for
new rainfalls; therefore they want to save whatever is in the field. Similarly,
a person who is actually advanced in self-realization protects his energy by
controlling the senses. It is advised that after the age of fifty, one should
retire from family life and should conserve the energy of the body for
utilization in the advancement of Kf l).a consciousness. Unless one is able
to control the senses and engage them in the transcendental loving service
of Mukunda, there is no possibility of salvation.
During the daytime in autumn, the sun is very scorching, but at night,
due to the clear moonshine, people get relief from the day's fatigue. If a
person takes shelter of Mukunda, or Kf l).a, he can be saved from the
fatigue of misidentifying the body with the self. Mukunda, or Krwa, is
also the source of solace to the damsels of V rndavana. The damsels of
Vrajabhumi are always suffering because of separation from Kf J).a. When
they meet Kf l).a during the moonlit autumn night, their fatigue of separa
tion is also satiated. When the sky is clear of all clouds, the stars at night
shine very beautifully ; similarly, when a person is actually situated in Krwa
consciousness, he is cleared of all dirty things, and he becomes as beautiful
as the stars in the autumn sky. Although the Vedas prescribe karma in the
form of offering sacrifices, their ultimate purpose is stated in the Bhagavad
gitii: one has to accept Kf l).a consciousness after thoroughly understanding
the purpose of the Vedas. Therefore the clean heart exhibited by a devotee
in Krwa consciousness can be compared to the clean sky of the autumn
season. During autumn, the moon looks very bright along with the stars in
the clear sky. Lord Kf l).a Himself appeared in the sky of the Y adu
dynasty, and He was exactly like the moon surrounded by the stars, or the
members of the Y adu dynasty. When there are ample blooming flowers in
the gardens in the forest, the fresh, aromatic breeze gives a great relief
to the person who has suffered during the summer and rainy seasons.
Unfortunately, such breezes could not give any relief to the gopis
because of their hearts' dedication to Krwa. People in general might
have taken pleasure in that nice autumn breeze, but the gopis, not
being embraced by Krwa, were not very satisfied.
On arrival of the autumn season, all the cows, deer, birds and females in
Description of Autumn 145
general become pregnant, because in that season generally all the husbands
become impelled by sex desire. This is exactly like the transcendentalists
who, by the grace of the Supreme Lord, are bestowed with the benediction
of their destinations in life. Srila Rupa Gosvami has instructed in his
Upaddiimrta that one should follow devotional service with great
enthusiasm, patience and conviction and should follow the rules and
regulations, keep oneself clean from material contamination and stay in
the association of devotees. By following these principles, one is sure to
achieve the desired result of devotional service. For he who patiently
follows the regulative principles of devotional service, the time will come
when he will achieve the result, as the wives who reap results by becoming
pregnant.
During the autumn, the lotus flowers in the lakes grow in large numbers
because of the absence of lilies; both the lilies and the lotus flowers grow
by sunshine, but during the autumn season, the scorching sunshine helps
only the lotus. This example is given in the case of a country where the
king or the government is strong; the rise of unwanted elem"ents like
thieves and robbers cannot prosper. When the citizens become confident
that they will not be attacked by robbers, they develop very satisfactorily.
A strong government is compared to the scorching sunshine in the autumn
season; the lilies are compared to unwanted persons like robbers, and the
lotus flowers are compared to the satisfied citizens of the government.
During autumn, the fields become filled with ripened grains. At that time,
the people become happy over the harvest and observe various ceremonies,
such as Navanna-the offering of new grains to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. The new grains are first offered to the Deities in various temples,
and all are invited to take sweet rice made of these new grains. There are
other religious ceremonies and methods of worship, particularly in Bengal,
where the greatest of all such ceremonies is held, called Durgii Piijii.
In Vrndavana the autumn season was very beautiful then because of the
presence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kr  a and Balarama.
The mercantile community, the royal order and great sages were free to
move to achieve their desired benedictions. Similarly, the transcendental
ists, when freed from the encagement of the material body, also achieved
their desired goal. During the rainy season, the mercantile community
cannot move from one place to another and so do not get their desired
profit. Nor can the royal order go from one place to another to collect
taxes from the people. As for saintly persons who must travel to preach
transcendental knowledge, they also are restrained by the rainy season.
But during the autumn, all of them leave their confines. In the case of the
146 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
transcendentalist, be he a jniini, a yogi, or a devotee, because of the
material body he cannot actually enjoy spiritual achievement. But as soon
as he gives up the body, or after death, the jniini merges into the spiritual
effulgence of the Supreme Lord; the yogi transfers himself to the various
higher planets, and the devotee goes to the planet of the Supreme Lord,
Goloka V rndavana, or the Vaiku!1thas, and thus enjoys his eternal spiritual
life.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twentieth Chapter of
Kr !la, "Description of A utumn."
2 1 I The Go pis Attracted by the Flute
Kr l)a was very pleased with the atmosphere of the forest where flowers
bloomed and bees and drones hummed very jubilantly. While the birds ,
trees and branches were all looking very happy, Kr  1a, tending the cows ,
accompanied by Sri Balarama and the cowherd boys , began to vibrate His
transcendental flute. After hearing the vibration of the flute of Kr l)a, the
gopis in V rndavana remembered Him and began to talk amongst themselves
about how nicely Kr l)a was playing His flute. When the gopis were de
scribing the sweet vibration of Kr l)a 's flute, they also remembered their
pastimes with Him ; thus their minds became disturbed , and they were
unable to describe completely the beautiful vibrations . While discussing
the transcendental vibration, they remembered also how K[ l)a dressed,
decorated with a peacock feather on His head , just like a dancing actor,
and with blue flowers pushed over His ear. His garment glowed yellow
gold , and He was garlanded with a vaijayanti necklace. Dressed in such an
attractive way, Krwa filled up the holes of His flute with the nectar
emanating from His lips. So they rememb ered Him , entering the forest of
V rndavana, which is always glorified by the footprints of Kf l)a and His
compamons .
Kr l)a was very expert in playing the flute, and the gopis were captivated
by the sound vibration, which was not only attractive to them , but to all
living creatures who heard it . One of the gopis told her friends , "The
highest perfection of the eyes is to see Kr l)a and Balarama entering the
forest and playing Their flutes and tending the cows with Their friends. "
Persons who are constantly engaged in the transcendental meditation of
seeing Kr l)a, internally and externally, by thinking of Him playing the
flute and entering the v rndavana forest , have really a ttained the perfection
of samiidhi. Samiidhi (trance) means absorption of all the activities of the
senses on a particular object , and the gopis indicate that the pastimes of
147
148 Kr l).a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Kr§ a are the perfection of all meditation and samiidhi. It is also confirmed
in the Bhagavad-gita that anyone who is always absorbed in the thought of
Kr§ a is the topmost of all yog s.
Another gopi expressed her opinion that Krwa and Balarama, while
tending the cows, appeared just like actors going to play on a dramatic
stage. Kr§ a was dressed in glowing garments of yellow, Balarama in blue,
and They held new twigs of mango tree, peacock feathers, and bunches of
flowers in Their hands. Dressed with garlands of lotus flowers, They were
sometimes singing very sweetly among Their friends. One gopi told her
friend, "How is it KH a and Balarama are looking so beautiful?" Another
gopi said, "My dear friend, we cannot even think of His bamboo flute
what sort of pious activities did it execute so that it is now enjoying the
nectar of the lips of Kr§ a?" Kr§!la sometimes kisses the gopis; therefore
the transcendental nectar of His lips is available only to them, and His lips
are considered their property. Therefore the gopis asked: "How is it
possible that the flute, which is nothing but a bamboo rod, is always
engaged in enjoying the nectar from Krwa's lips? Because the flute is
engaged in the service of the Supreme Lord, the mother and the father of
the flute must be happy."
The lakes and the rivers are considered to be the mothers of the trees
because the trees live simply by drinking water. So the waters of the lakes
and rivers of Vrndavana were full of happy lotus flowers because the
waters were thinking, "How is it our son, the bamboo rod, is enjoying the
nectar of Krwa's lips?" The bamboo trees standing by the banks of the
rivers and the lakes were also happy to see their descendant so engaged in
the service of the Lord, just as persons who are advanced in knowledge
take pleasure to see their descendants engage in the service of the Lord.
The trees were overwhelmed with joy and were incessantly yielding honey,
which flowed from the beehives hanging on the branches.
Sometimes the gopis spoke thus to their friends about Kr§va: "Dear
friends, our Vrndavana is proclaiming the glories of this entire earth
because this planet is glorified by the lotus footprints of the son of Devaki.
Besides that, when Govinda plays His flute, the peacocks immediately
become mad. When all the animals and trees and plants, either on the top
of Govardhana Hill or in the valley, see the dancing of the peacock, they all
stand still and listen to the transcendental sound of the flute with great
attention. We think that this boon is not possible or available on any other
planet." Although the gopfs were village cowherd women and girls, they
had knowledge of Kr§va. Similarly  one can learn the highest truths simply
by hearing the Vedas from authoritative sources.
The Gopis Attracted by the Flute 149
Another gopi said, "My dear friends, just see the deer! Although they
are dumb animals, they have approached the son of Maharaja Nanda,
Kr  a. Not only are they attracted by the dress of Krwa and Balarama, but
as soon as they hear the playing of the flute, the deer, along with their
husbands, offer respectful obeisances unto the Lord by looking at Him
with great affection." The gop is were envious of the deer because the deer
were ,able to offer their service to Kr IJa along with their husbands. The
gopis thought themselves not so fortunate because whenever they wanted
to go to Kr IJa, their husbands were not very happy.
Another gopi said, "My dear friends, Krwa is so nicely dressed that He
appears to be the impetus to various kinds of ceremonies held by the
womenfolk. Even the wives of the denizens of heaven become attracted
after hearing the transcendental sound of His flute. Although they are
travelling in the air in their airplanes, enjoying the company of their
husbands, on hearing the sound of Krwa's flute, they immediately become
perturbed. Their hair is loosened and their tight dresses are slackened."
This means that the transcendental sound of the flute of Krsna extended
to all corners of the universe. Also, it is significant that the gopis knew
about the different kinds of airplanes flying in the sky.
Another gopi said to her friends, "My dear friends, the cows are also
charmed as soon as they hear the transcendental sound of the flute of
Kr IJa. It sounds to them like the pouring of nectar, and they immediately
spread their long ears just to catch the liquid nectar of the flute. As for the
calves, they are seen with the nipples of their mothers pressed in their
mouths, but they cannot suck the milk. They remain struck with devotion,
and tears glide down their eyes, illustrating vividly how they are embracing
Kr IJa heart to heart." These phenomena indicate that even the cows and
calves in Vrndavana knew how to cry for Kp? a and embrace Him heart
to heart. Actually, Krwa conscious affection can be culminated in shedding
tears from the eyes.
A younger gopi told her mother, "My dear mother, the birds, who are
all looking at Krwa playing on His flute, are sitting very attentively on the
branches and twigs of different trees. From their features it appears that
they have forgotten everything and are engaged only in hearing Krwa's
flute. This proves that they are not ordinary birds; they are great sages and
devotees, and just to hear Kr  ta's flute they have appeared in Vptdavana
forest as birds." Great sages and scholars are interested in Vedic knowledge,
1 JU I the essence of Vedic knowledge is stated in the Bhagavad-gita: vedais
 .:a sarvair aham eva vedya[!_. Through the knowledge of the Vedas, Kr IJa
has to be understood. From the behavior of these birds, it appeared that
1 50 kr  a, the Supreme Pers onality of Godhead
they were great scholars in Vedic knowledge and that they took to Krwa 's
transcendental vibration and rej ected all branches ' of Vedic knowledge.
Even the River Yamuna, being desirous to embrace the lotus feet of Kr pa
after hearing the transcendental vibration of His flute , broke her fierce
waves to flow very nicely with lotus flowers in her hands, just to present
flowers to Mukunda with deep feeling.
The scorching heat of the autumn sunshine was sometimes intolerable ,
and therefore the clouds in the sky appeared in sympathy above Kr pa
and Balarama and Their boy friends while They engaged in blowing Their
flutes. The clouds served as a soothing umbrella over Their heads just to
make friendship with Kr  la. The wanton aborigine girls also became fully
satisfied when they smeared their faces and breasts with the dust of
Vrndavana , which was reddish from the touch of Kr pa's lotus feet. The
aborigine girls had very full breasts , and they were also very lusty, but
when their lovers felt their breasts, they were not very satisfied. When
they came out into the midst of the forest , they saw that while Kr pa was
walking, some of the leaves and creepers of V rndavana turned reddish
from the kunkuma powder which fell from His lotus feet. His lotus feet
were held by the gopis on their breasts, which were also smeared with
kunkuma powder , but when Kr pa travelled in the V rndavana forest with
Balarama and His boy friends , the reddish powder fell on the ground of
the Vrndavana forest. So the lusty aborigine girls , while looking toward
Kr pa playing His flute , saw the reddish kunk uma on the ground and
immediately took it and smeared it over their faces and breasts. In this way
they became fully satisfied , although they were not satisfied when their
lovers touched their breasts. All material lusty desires can be immediately
satisfied if one comes in contact with Kr pa consciousness.
Another gopi began to praise the unique position of Govardhana Hill in
this way : "How fortunate is this Govardhana Hill, for it is enj oying the
association of Lord Krsna and Balarama who are accustomed to walk on it.
Thus Govardhana is always in touch with the lotus feet of the Lord . And
because Govardhana Hill is so obliged to Lord Kr pa and Balarama, it is
supplying different kinds of fruits, roots and herbs, as well as very pleasing
crystal water from its lakes, in presentation to the Lord . " The best presen
tation offered by Govardhana Hill , however , was newly grown grass for
the cows and calves. Govardhana Hill knew how to please the Lord by
pleasing His most bdoved associates , the cows and the cowherd b o ys.
Another gopi said that everything appeared wonderful when Kr pa and
B alarama travelled in the forest of Vrndavana playing Their flutes and
making intimate friendship with all kinds of moving and nonmoving living
The Gopis Attracted by the Flute 151
creatures. When Kr  a and Balarama played on Their transcendental
flutes, the moving creatures became stunned and stopped their activities,
and the nonmoving living creatures, like trees and plants, began to shiver
with ecstasy.
Kr  a and Balarama carried binding ropes on Their shoulders and in
Their hands, just like ordinary cowherd boys. While milking the cows, the
boys bound the hind legs with a small rope. This rope almost always hung
from .the shoulders of the boys, and it was not absent on the shoulders of
Kr  a and Balarama. In spite of Their being the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, They played exactly like cowherd boys, and therefore every
thing became wonderful and attractive. While Kr  a was engaged in
tending the cows in the forest of Vrndavana or on Govardhana Hill, the
gopfs iv the village were always absorbed in thinking of Him and dis
cussing'- His different pastimes. This is the perfect example of Krwa
consciousness: to somehow or other remain always engrossed in thoughts
of Kr !la. The vivid example is always present in the behavior of the gopfs;
therefore Lord Caitanya declared that no one can worship the Supreme
Lord by any method which is better than the method of the gopis. The
gopfs were not born in very high brahmal}a or k§atriya families; they were
born in the families of vaisyas, and not in big mercantile communities but
in the families of cowherd men. , They were not very well educated,
although they heard all sorts of knowledge from the brahmar-as, the
authorities of Vedic knowledge. The gopfs ' only purpose was to remain
always absorbed in thoughts of Kr  a.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-first Chapter of
Kr  a, "The Gopfs Attracted by the Flute. "
22 I Stealin g the Garments
of the Unmarried Gopi Girls
According to V edic civilization, unmarried girls from ten to fourteen
years of age are supposed to worship either Lord Siva or the goddess
Durga in order to get a nice husband. l3ut the unmarried girls of V rndavana
were already attracted by the beauty of Kr  1a. They were, however ,
engaged in the worship of the goddess Durga in the beginning of the
hemanta season (just prior to the winter season) . The first month of
hemanta is called Agrahayana (October-November), and at that time all
the unmarried gopis of V rndavana began to worship goddess Durga with a
vow. They first ate havi§yiinna, a kind of foodstuff prepared by boiling
together mung dahl and rice without any spices or turmeric. According to
Vedic injunction, this kind of foodstuff is recommended to purify the
body before one enacts a ritualistic ceremony. All the unmarried gopis in
V rndavana used to daily worship goddess Katyayani early in the morning
after taking bath in the River Yamuna. Katyayani is another name for god
dess Durga. The goddess is worshiped by preparing a doll made out of sand
mixed with earth from the bank of the Yamuna. It is recommended in the
Vedic scriptures that a deity may be made from different kinds of material
elements ; it can be painted , made of metal, made of j ewels, made of wood ,
earth o r stone o r can be conceived within the heart o f the worshiper. The
Mayavadi philosopher takes all these forms of the deity to be imaginary,
hut actually they are accepted in  the V edic literatures to be identical with
either the Supreme Lord or a respective demigod.
The unmarried gopis used to prepare the deity of goddess Durga and
worship it with candana pulp , garlands, incense lamps and all kinds of
presentations-fruits, grains and twigs of plants . After worshiping, it is the
custom to pray for some benediction. The unmarried girls used to pray
with great devotion to goddess Katyayani, addressing her as follows : " 0
supreme eternal energy o f the Personality of Godhead, 0 supreme mystic
1 52
Garu a struck the body of Kaliya with his effulgent golden wings. (p. 1 28)
Kr !la would p raise the m , " M y dear fri e n d s , you are danci_ng and sin ging very nicely . "
( p . 1 3 2)
Pralambasura looked j ust like a cloud with lightning carrying the moon. ( p . 1 33)

Krwa, the supreme mystic, immediately swallowed up all the flames of the fire. ( p. 1 35)
Due to remaining in the water for a long time , the gopis felt cold and were shivering.
( p. 1 54)
" D o not be afraid of the hill an d think that i t will fall fro m My han d . " ( p . 1 75 )
King Indra from the heavenly planet appeared before Kr !la from a seclu ded place .
(p . 1 80 )
Stealing the Garments of the Unmarried Gopi Girls 153
power, 0 supreme controller of this material world, 0 goddess, please be
kind to us and arrange for our marriage with the son of Nanda Maharaja,
Krwa." The Vai  avas generally do not worship any demigods. Srila
Narottama dasa Thakur has strictly forbidden all worship of the demigods
for anyone who wants to advance in pure devotional service. Yet the gopis,
who are beyond compare in their affection for Kr  1a, were seen to worship
Durga. The worshipers of demigods also sometimes mention that the gopis
also worshiped goddess Durga, but we must understand the purpose of the
gopis. Generally, people worship goddess Durga for some material bene
diction. Here, the gopis prayed to the goddess to become wives of Lord
Krwa. The purport is that if Kr  a is the center of activity, a devotee can
adopt any means to achieve that goal. The gopis could adopt any means
to satisfy or serve Kr  a. That was the superexcellent characteristic of the
gopis. They worshiped goddess Durga completely for one month in order
to have Kr  la as their husband. Every day they prayed for Kr  a, the son
of Nanda Maharaja, to become their husband.
Early in the morning, the gopis used to go to the bank of the Yamuna to
take bath. They would assemble together, capturing each other's hands,
and loudly sing of the wonderful pastimes of Kr  a. It is an old system
among Indian girls and women that when they take bath in the river they
place their garments on the bank and dip into the water completely naked.
The portion of the river where the girls and women take bath was strictly
prohibited to any male member, and this is still the system. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, knowing the minds of the unmarried young gopis,
benedicted them with their desired objective. They had prayed for Kr  a
to become their husband, and Kr.wa wanted to fulfill their desires.
At the end of the month, Kr  m, along with His friends, appeared on
the scene. Another name of Kr  a is Y ogesvara, or master of all mystic
powers. By practicing meditation, the yogi can study the psychic move
ment of other men, and certainly Kr pa could understand the desire of
the gopis. Appearing on the scene, Kr  a immediately collected all the
garments of the gopis, climbed up in a nearby tree, and with smiling face
began to speak to them.
"My dear girls," He said. "Please come here one after another and pray
for your garments and then take them away. I'm not joking with you. I'm
just telling the truth. I have no desire to play any joke with you, for you
have observed the regulative principles for one month by worshiping
goddess Katyayani. Please do not come here all at once. Come alone; I
want to see each of you in your complete beauty, for you all have thin
waists. I have requested you to come alone. Now please comply."
154 1\r :.;ta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
When the girls in the water heard such joking words from Kr  a, they
began to look at one another and smile. They were very joyous to hear
such a request from Kr  a because they were already in love with Him.
Out of shyness, they looked at one another, but they could not come out
of the water because they were naked. Due to remaining in the water for
a long time, they felt cold and were shivering, yet upon hearing the
pleasing and joking words of Govinda, their minds were perturbed with
great joy. They began to tell Kr  a, "Dear son of Nanda Maharaja, please
do not joke with us in that way. It is completely unjust to us. You are a
very respectable boy because You are the son of Nanda Maharaja, and You
are very dear to us, but You should not play this joke on us because now
we are all shivering from the cold water. Kindly deliver our garments
immediately, otherwise we shall suffer." They then began to appeal to
Kr va with great submission. "Dear Syamasundara," they said, "we are
all Your eternal servitors. Whatever You order us to do, we are obliged to
perform without hesitation because we consider it our religious duty. But
if You insist on puttingthis proposal to us, which is impossible to perform,
then certainly we will have to go to Nanda Maharaja and lodge a complaint
against You. If Nanda Maharaja does not take action, then we shall tell
King Kamsa about Your misbehavior."
Upon hearing this appeal by the unmarried gopis, Kr va answered, "My
dear girls, if you think that you are My eternal servitors and you are
always ready to execute My order, then My request is that, with your
smiling faces, you please come here alone, one after another, and take
away your garments. If you do not come here, however, and if you lodge
complaints to My father, I shall not care anyway, for I know My father is
old and cannot take any action against Me."
When the gopis saw that Kf l)a was strong and determined, they had no
alternative but to abide by His order. One after another they came out
of the water, but because they were completely naked, they tried to cover
their nakedness by placing their left hand over their pubic area. In that
posture they were all shivering. Their simple presentation was so pure that
Lord Knl)a immediately became pleased with them. All the unmarried
gopis who prayed to Katyayani to have Kr l)a as their husband were thus
satisfied. A woman cannot be naked before any male except her husband.
The unmarried gopis desired Kr va as their husband, and He fulfilled their
desire in this way. Being pleased with them, He took their garments on
His shoulder and began to speak as follows. "My dear girls, you have
committed a great offense by going naked in the River Yamuna. Because of
this, the predominating deity of the Yamuna, Varu 1adeva, has become
Stealing the Garments of the Unmarried Gopi Girls 155
displeased with you. Please, therefore, just touch your foreheads with
folded palms and bow down before the demigod VaruJJa in order to be
excused from this offensive act." The gopis were all simple souls, and
whatever Kr JJa said they took to be true. In order to be freed from the
wrath of Varu]Jadeva, as well as to fulfill the desired end of their vows and
ultimately to please their worshipable Lord, Kr !Ja, they immediately
abided by His order. Thus they became the greatest lovers of Kr JJa, and
His most obedient servitors.
Nothing can compare to the Kn!Ja consciousness of the gopis. Actually,
the gopis did not care for Varu!Ja or any other demigod; they only wanted
to satisfy Kr !la. KnJJa became very ingratiated and satisfied by the simple
dealings of the gopis, and He immediately delivered their respective
garments, one after another. Although KH!Ja cheated the young un
married gopis and made them stand naked before Him and enjoyed joking
words with them, and although He treated them just like dolls and stole
their garments, they were still pleased with Him and never lodged com
plaints against Him. This attitude of the gopis is described by Lord
Caitanya Mahaprabhu when He prays, "My dear Lord KH!Ja, You may
embrace me or trample me under Your feet, or You may make me broken
hearted by never being present before me. Whatever You like, You can
do, because You have complete freedom to act. But in spite of all Your
dealings, You are my Lord eternally, and I have no other worshi pable
object." This is the attitude of the gopis toward Kr JJa.
Lord Kr JJa was pleased with them, and since they all desired to have
Him as their husband, He told them, "My dear well-behaved girls, I know
of your desire for Me and why you worship goddess Katyayan'i, and I
completely approve of your action. Anyone whose full consciousness is
always absorbed in Me, even if in lust, is elevated. As a fried seed cannot
fructify, so any desire in connection with My loving service cannot pro
duce any fruitive result, as in ordinary karma. "
There is a statement in the Brahma-samhitii: karmiirti nirdahati kintu ca
bhakti-bhiijiim. Everyone is bound by his fruitive activities, but the
devotees, because they work completely for the satisfaction of the Lord,
suffer no reactions. Similarly, the gopis ' attitude toward KH!Ja, although
seemingly lusty, should not be considered to be like the lusty desires of
ordinary women. The reason is explained by Kr !la Himself. Activities in
devotional service to Kr JJa are transcendental to any fruitive result.
"My dear gopis, " Kr JJa continued, "your desire to have Me as your
husband will be fulfilled because with this desire you have worshiped
goddess Katyayani. I promise you that during the next autumn season you
156 Kr l).a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
shall be able to meet with Me, and you shall enj oy Me as your husband."
Taking shelter of the shade of the trees, Krwa became very happy.
While walking He began to address the inhabitants of Vrndavana. "My
dear Stokakrwa, My dear Varuthapa, My dear Bhadrasena, My dear
Sudama, My dear Subala, My dear Arjuna, My dear Visala, My dear
];t abha-just look at these most fortunate trees of Vrndavana. They have
dedicated their lives to the welfare of others. Individually they are
tolerating all kinds of natural disturbances, such as hurricanes, torrents of
rain, scorching heat and piercing cold, but they are very careful to relieve
our fatigues and give us shelter. My dear friends, I think they are glorified
in this birth as trees. They are so careful to give shelter to others that they
are like noble, highly elevated charitable men who never deny charity to
one who approaches them. No one is denied shelter by these trees. They
supply various kinds of facilities to human society, such as leaves, flowers,
fruit, shade, roots, bark, flavor extracts and fuel. They are the perfect
example of noble life. They are like a noble person who has sacrificed
everything possible-his body, mind, activities, intelligence and words-in
engaging in the welfare of all living entities. "
Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead walked on the bank of the
Yamuna, touching the leaves of the trees and their fruits, flowers and
twigs, and praising their glorious welfare activities. Different people may
accept certain welfare activities to be beneficial for human society, ac
cording to their own views , but the, welfare activity that can be rendered
to people in general, for eternal benefit, is the spreading of the Kr p.a
consciousness movement. Everyone should be prepared to propagate this
movement. As instructed by Lord Caitanya, one should be humbler than
the grass on the ground and more tolerant than the tree. The toleration of
the trees is explained by Lord Krwa Himself, and those who are engaged
in the preaching of Krwa consciousness should learn lessons from the
teachings of Lord Krwa and Lord Caitanya through Their direct disciplic
successiOn.
While passing through the forest of Vrndavana on the bank of the
Yamuna, Krwa sat down at a beautiful spot and allowed the cows to
drink the cold and transparent water of the Yamuna. Being fatigued, the
cowherd boys, Kr l/a and Balarama also drank. After seeing the young
gopis taking bath in the Yamuna, Krwa passed the rest of the morning
with the boys.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-second Chapter of
Kr  la, «Stealing the Garments of the Unmarried Gopi Girls. "
23 I Delivering the Wives of the Brahma as
Who Performed Sacrifices
The morning passed , and the cowherd boys were very hungry because
they had not eaten breakfast. They immediately approached Kr pa and
Balarama and said , " D ear Kr pa and Balarama, You are both all-powerful;
You can kill many , many demo ns, but today we are much afflicted with
hunger , and this is disturbing us. Please arrange for something that will
mitigate our hunger."
Requested in this way by Their friends, Lord Kr pa and Balarama
immediately showed compassion on certain wives of b riihmw;ws who were
performing sacrifices. These wives were great devotees of the Lord , and
Kr pa took this opportunity to bless them. He said , "My dear friends,
please go to the house of the b riihmar;ws nearby. They are now engaged in
performing Vedic sacrifices known as iingirasa, for they desire elevation to
heavenly planets. All of you please go to them. " Then Lord Kr  t'a warned
His friends, "These b riihmar;ws are not V ai pavas. They cannot even chant
Our names, Kr  1a and Balarama. They are very busy in chanting the V edic
hymns, although the purpose of Vedic knowledge is to find Me. But
because they are not attracted by the names of Krwa and Balarama, you
had better not ask them for anything in My name. Better ask for some
charity in the name of Balarama . "
Charity i s generally given t o high class b riihmar;ws, but Kr pa and
Balarama did not appear in a b riihmar;ia family. Balarama was known as
the son of Vasudeva , a k§atriya, and Kr  1a was known in Vrndavana as the
son of Nanda Maharaj a , who was a vaisya. Neither belonged to the
b riihmar;w community. Therefore , Kr  1a considered that the b riihmar;ws
engaged in performing sacrifices might not be induced to give charity to a
k§atriya and vaisya. "But at least if you utter the n ame of Balarama, they
may prefer to give in charity to a k§atriya, rather than to Me, because I am
o n ly a vaisya. "
1 5 7
158 .Kf  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Being thus ordered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, all the
boys went to the b riihmm;ws and began to ask for some charity. They
approached them with folded hands and fell down on the ground to offer
respect. "0 earthly gods, kindly hear us who are ordered by Lord Kr t;J-a
and Balarama. We hope you know Them both very well, and we wish you
all good fortune. Kr \la and Balarama are tending cows nearby, and we
have accompanied Them. We have come to ask for some food from you .
. You are all briihmarzas and knowers of religious principles, and if you
think that you should give us charity, then give us some food and we
shall all eat along with Kr t;J-a and Balarama. You are the most respectable
briihmaras within the human society, and you are expected to know all
the principles of religious procedure."
Although the boys were village boys and were not expected to be
learned in all the Vedic principles of religious ritual, they hinted that
because of their association with Kf t;la and Balarama, they knew all those
principles. When the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kf t;la and Bala
rama, asked for food, the boys would immediately deliver it without
hesitation because it is stated in the Bhagavad-gitii that one should
perform yafiia (sacrifices) only for the satisfaction of Vi t;J-U.
The boys continued, "Lord Vi t;J-U as Kr t;J-a and Balarama is standing
waiting, and you should immediately deliver whatever food you have in
your stock." They also explained to the briihmarzas how foodstuffs are to
be accepted. Generally, the Vai t;lavas, or pure devotees of the Lord, do
not take part in ordinary sacrificial performances. But they know very
well the ceremonials called dik ii pasusamtha sautriimnya. One is per
mitted to take food after the procedure of dik ii and before the animal
sacrificial ceremony and the Sautriimarzi, or ceremony in which liquors are
also offered. The boys said, "We can take your food at the present stage
of your ceremony, for now it will not be prohibitory. So you can deliver
us the foodstuff."
Although the companions of Lord Kr va and Balarama were simple
cowherd boys, they were in a position to dictate even to the high class
briihmarzas engaged in the Vedic rituals of sacrifices. But the smiirta
briihmarzas, who were simply sacrificial-minded, could not understand the
dictation of the transcendental devotees of the Lord. They could not even
appreciate the begging of the Supreme Lord, Kr t;J-a and Balarama. Al
though they heard all the arguments on behalf of Kf t;la and Balarama,
they did not care for them, and they refused to speak to the boys. D espite
being highly elevated in the knowledge of Vedic sacrificial rites, all such
nondevotee briihmarzas , although they think of themselves as very highly
Delivering the Wives of the BrahmaJ;taS 159
elevated, are ignorant, foolish persons. All their activities are useless
because they do not know the purpose of the Vedas, as it is explained in
the Bhagavad-gitii: to understand Kr !J.a. In spite of their advancement in
Vedic knowledge and rituals, they do not understand Kr  1a; therefore
their knowledge of the Vedas is supe ficial. Lord Caitanya, therefore,
gave His valuable opinion that a person does not have to be born in a
briihmar;w family; if he knows Kr !la or the science of Kr !la consciousness,
he is more than a briihmar;w, and he is quite fit to become spiritual master.
There are various details to be observed in the performance of sacrifices,
and they are known collectively as dda. They are as follows: kala means
the time, prthah dravya, the different detailed paraphernalia, mantra,
hymns, tantra, scriptural evidences, agni, fire, rtvij, learned performers of
sacrifices, devatii, the demigods, vajamiina, the performer of the sacrifices,
hratu, the sacrifice itself, and dharma, the procedures. All these are for
satisfying Kr !J.a. It is confirmed that He is the actual enjoyer of all
sacrifices because He is directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead and
the Supreme Absolute Truth, beyond the conception or speculation of
material senses. He is present just like an ordinary human boy. But for
persons who identify themselves with this body, it is very difficult to
understand Him. The b riihmar;zas were very interested in the comforts of
this material body and in elevation to the higher planetary residences
called svarga-viisa. They were therefore completely unable to understand
the position of Kr !J.a.
When the boys saw that the b riihmar;zas would not speak to them,- they
became very disappointed. They then returned to Lord Kr !la and Balarama
and explained everything that had happened. After hearing their state
ments, the Supreme Personality began to smile. He told them that they
should not be sorry for being refused by the b riihmar;zas because that is
the way of begging. He convinced them that while one is engaged in
collecting or begging, one should not think that he will be successful
everywhere. He may be unsuccessful in some places, but that should not
be cause for disappointment. Lord Kr !la then asked all the boys to go
again, but this time to the wives of those b riihmm;as engaged in sacrifices.
He also informed them that these wives were great devotees. "They are
always absorbed in thinking of Us. Go there and ask for some food in My
name and the name of Balarama, and I am sure that they will deliver you
as much food as you desire. "
Carrying out Kr !la-'s order, the boys immediately went t o the wives of
the briihmar;zas. They found the wives sitting inside their house. They
were very beautifully decorated with ornaments. After offering them all
160 KH a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
respectful obeisances, the boys said, "Dear mothers, please accept our
humble obeisances and hear our statement. May we inform you that Lord
Kr l)a and Balarama are nearby. They have come here with the cows, and
you may know also that we have come here under Their instructions. All
of us are very hungry; therefore, we have come to you for some food.
Please give us something to eat for Kr l)a, Balarama and ourselves."
Immediately upon hearing this, the wives of the briihmm;as became
anxious for K!" l)a and Balarama. These reactions were spontaneous. They
did not have to be convinced of the importance of Kr l)a and Balarama;
immediately upon hearing Their names, they became very anxious to see
Them. Being advanced by thinking of Kr l)a constantly, they were
performing the greatest form of mystic meditation. All the wives then
became very busily engaged in filling up different pots with nice foodstuff.
Due to the performance of the sacrifice, the various food was all very
palatable. After collecting a feast, they prepared to go to Kr l)a, their
most lovable object, exactly in the way rivers flow to the sea.
For a long time the wives had been anxious to see K!" l)a. However,
when they were preparing to leave home to go see Him, their husbands,
fathers, sons and relatives asked them not to go. But the wives did not
comply. When a devotee is called by the attraction of Kr l)a, he does not
care for bodily ties. The women entered the forest of Vrndavana on the
bank of the Yamuna, which was verdant with vegetation and newly
grown vines and flowers. Within that forest, they saw Kr l)a and Balarama
engaged in tending the cows, along with Their very affectionate boy
friends.
The briihmm;as ' wives saw Krwa putting on a garment glittering like
gold. He wore a nice garland of forest flowers and a peacock feather on
His head. He was also painted with the minerals found in Vrndavana, and
He looked exactly like a dancing actor on a theatrical stage. They saw Him
keeping one hand on the shoulder of His friend, and in His other hand, He
was holding a lotus flower. His ears were decorated with lilies, He wore
marks of tilaka, and He was smihng charmingly. With their very eyes, the
wives of the briihma JaS saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, of
whom they had heard so much, who was so dear to them, and in whom
their minds were always absorbed. Now they saw Him eye to eye and face
to face, and Krwa entered within their hearts through their eyes.
They began to embrace Kr l)a to their hearts' content, and the distress
of separation was mitigated immediately. They were just like great sages
who, by their advancement of knowledge, merge into the existence of the
Supreme. As the Supersoul living in everyone's heart, Lord Kr l)a could
Delivering the Wives of the Brahma as 161
understand their minds; they had come to Him despite all the protests of
their reh ives, fathers, husbands, brothers, and all the duties of household
affairs. They came just to see Him who was their life and soul. They were
actually following Kr  ta's instruction in the Bhagavad-gita: one should
surrender to Him, giving up all varieties of occupational and religious
duties. The wives of the briihmm;ws actually carried out the instruction of
the Bhagavad-gita in totaL He therefore began to speak to them, smiling
very magnificently. It should be noted in this connection that when Kr  a
entered into the wives' hearts and when they embraced Him and felt the
transcendental bliss of being merged with Him, the Supreme Lord Kr  a
did not lose His identity, nor did the individual wives lose theirs. The
individuality of both the Lord and the wives remained, yet they felt
oneness in existence. When a lover submits to his lover without any pinch
of personal consideration, that is called oneness. Lord Caitanya has taught
us this feeling of oneness in His Sik§ii§taka: Kr  1a may act freely, doing
whatever He likes, but the devotee should always be in oneness or in
agreement with His desires. That oneness was exhibited by the wives of the
briihmm;ws in their love for Kr§ a.
Kr  la welcomed them with the following words: "My dear wives of the
briihmm;ws, you are all very fortunate and welcomed here. Please let Me
know what I can do for you. Your coming here, neglecting all the
restrictions and hindrances of relatives, fathers, brothers and husbands, in
order to see Me, is completely befitting. One who does this actually knows
his self interest, because rendering transcendental loving service unto Me,
without motive or restriction, is actually auspicious for the living entities."
Lord Kr§ a here C<;mfirms that the highest perfectional stage of the con
ditional soul is surrender to Him. One must give up all other responsibili
ties. This complete surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
the most auspicious path for the conditioned soul because the Supreme
Lord is the supreme objective of love. Everyone is loving Kr pa ultimately,
but realization is according to the advancement of his knowledge. One
comes to understand that his self is the spirit soul, and the spirit soul is
nothing but a part and parcel of the Supreme Lord; therefore the Supreme
Lord is the ultimate goal of love, and thus one should surrender unto Him.
This surrender is considered auspicious for the conditioned soul. Our life,
property, home, wife, children, house, country, society and all parapher
nalia which are very dear to us are ex pansions of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. He is the central object of love because He gives us all bliss,
expanding Himself in so many ways according to our different situations,
namely bodily, mental or spiritual.
162 Kr  a, the Supreme Pe rso nality of Godhead
"My dear wives of the b riihmm;ws, " Krwa said. " You can now return to
your ho mes. Engage yourselves in sacrificial activities and be engaged in
the service of your husbands and household affairs so that your husbands
will be pleased with you , and the sacrifice which they have begun will be
properly executed. After all, your husbands are householders , and without
your help how can they execute their prescribed duties? "
The wives of the b riihmaT)aS replied , " D ear Lord , this sort o f instruction
does not befit You . Your eternal promise is that You will always protect
Your devotees, and now You must fulfill this promise. Anyone who comes
and surrenders unto You never goes back to the conditioned life of
material existence . We expect that You will now fulfill Your promise. We
have surrendered unto Your lotus feet, which are covered by the tulasi
leaves , so we have no more desire to return to the company of our so-called
relatives, friends, and society and give up the shelter of Y our lotus feet.
And what shaH we do , returning home? Our husbands, brothers, fathers,
sons, mothers and our friends do not expect to see us because we have
already left them all. Therefore we have no shelter to return to . Please ,
therefore , do not ask us to return home, but arrange for our stay under
Y our lotus feet so that we can eternally live under Y our protection."
The Su preme Personality of Godhead replied, "My dear w i ves, rest
assured that your husbands will no t neglect you on your return , nor will
your b rothers , sons, or fathers refuse to accept you . Because y o u are My
pure devotees, not only your relatives but also peo ple in general, as well as
the demigods, will be satisfied with y ou . " Krwa is situated as the Super
soul in everyone 's heart. So if someone becomes a pure devotee of Lord
Kr f!a, he immediately becomes pleasing to everyone. The pure devotee of
Lord Kr '!a is never inimical to anyone. A sane person cannot be an enemy
of a pure devotee. "Transcendental love for Me does not depend upon
bodily connection," Kr '!a said further, "but anyone whose mind is always
absorbed in Me will surely, very soon, come to Me for My eternal associa
tion. "
After being instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead , all the
wives again retu rned home to their respective husbands. Pleased to see
their wives back home, the b riihmaT)aS executed the performances of
sacrifices by sitting together, as it is enj oined in the siistras . According to
Vedic principle , religious rituals must be executed by the husband and
wife together. When the b riihmaT)as ' w ives returned , the sacrifice was duly
and nicely executed . One of the b riihmaT)as ' wives, however, who was
forcibly checked from going to see Kr f!a, began to remember Him as she
heard of His bodily features. Being completely absorbed in His thought ,
Delivering the Wives of the Brahma as 163
she gave up her material body conditioned by the laws of nature.
Sri Govinda, the ever-joyful Personality of Godhead, revealed His tran
scendental pastimes, appearing just like an ordinary human being, and
enjoyed the food offered by the wives of the brahma[taS. In this way, He
attracted common persons to Kr  a consciousness. He attracted to His
words and beauty all the cows, cowherd boys and damsels in Vrndavana.
After the return of their wives from Knl).a, the b rahma[taS engaged in
the performance of sacrifices began to regret their sinful activities in
refusing food to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They could finally
understand their mistake ; engaged in the performance of Vedic rituals,
they had neglected the Supreme Personality of Godhead who had appeared
just like an ordinary human being and asked for some food. They began to
condemn themselves after seeing the faith and devotion of their wives.
They regretted very much that, although their wives were elevated to the
platform of pure devotional service, they themselves could not understand
even a little bit of how to love and offer transcendental loving service to
the Supreme Soul. They began to talk among themselves. "To hell with
our being born b rahma!ws! To hell with our learning all Vedic literatures!
To hell with our performing great sacrifices and observing all the rules and
regulations! To hell with our family! To hell with our expert service in
performingthe rituals exactly to the description of scriptures! To hell with
it all, for we have not developed transcendental loving service to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is beyond the speculation of the
mind, body and senses."
The learned b rahma[tas, expert in Vedic ritualistic performances, were
properly regretful, because without developing Krwa consciousness, all
discharge of religious duties is simply a waste of time and energy. They
continued to talk among themselves; "The external energy of Kr l).a is so
strong that it can create illusion to overcome even the greatest mystic yogi.
Although we expert b rahmarws are considered to be the teachers of all other
sections of human society, we also have been illusioned by the external
energy. Just see how fortunate these women are who have so devotedly
dedicated their lives to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krwa. They
could easily give up their family connection, which is so difficult to do.
Family life is just like a dark well for the continuation of material
4 • ' '
m1senes.
Women in general, being very simple in heart, can very easily take to
Krwa consciousness, and when they develop love of Krwa they can easily
get liberation from the clutches of maya, which is very difficult for even
so-called intelligent and learned men to surpass. According to Vedic injunc-
164 Kr r:ta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
tion, women are not allowed to undergo the purificatory process of
initiation by the sacred thread, nor are they allowed to live as brahmaciirir-l
in the iisrama of the spiritual master; nor are they advised to undergo the
strict disciplinary procedure; nor are they very much expert in discussing
philosophy or self-realization. And by nature they are not very pure; nor
are they very much attached to auspicious activities. "But how wonderful
it is that they have developed transcendental love for Krwa, the Lord of
all mystic yogis!" the briihmarws exclaimed. "They have surpassed all of us
in firm faith and devotion unto Kr ra. Being too attached to the material
istic way of life, although we are considered to be masters in all purifica
tory processes, we did not actually know what the goal is. Even though we
were reminded of Krwa and Balarama by the cowherd boys, we disregarded
Them. We think now that it was simply a trick of mercy upon us by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead that He sent His friends to beg food
stuff from us. Otherwise, He had no need to send them. He could have
satisfied their hunger then and there just by willing to do so."
If someone denies Kn 1a's self-sufficiem:y on hearing that He was tending
the cows for Livelihood, or if someone doubts His not being in need of the
foodstuff, thinking that He was actually hungry, then one should under
stand that the goddess of fortune is always engaged in His service. In this
way the goddess can break her faulty habit of restlessness. In Vedic litera
tures like Brahma-sarhhitiiit is stated that Kr  1a is served in His abode with
great respect by not only one goddess of fortune but many thousands.
Therefore it is simply illusion for one to think that Kr§ra begged food from
the briihmar-as. It was actually a trick to show them the mercy of accepting
Him in pure devotional service. The Vedic ceremonial paraphernalia, the
suitable place, suitable time, different grades of articles for performing
ritualistic ceremonies, the Vedic hymns, the priest who is able to perform
such sacrifice, the fire and the demigods, the performer of the sacrifice
and the religious principles are all meant for understanding Kr ra, for
Kr§ la is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is the Supreme Lord
Vi  lU , and the Lord of all mystic yogis.
"Because He has appeared as a child in the dynasty of the Y adus, we
were so foolish that we could not understand that He is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead," the briihmar-as said. "But on the other hand, we
are very proud because we have such exalted wives who have developed
pure transcendental service of the Lord without being shackled by our
rigid position. Let us therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto the
lotus feet of Lord Kr ra, under whose illusory energy, called miiyii, we are
absorbed in fruitive activities. We therefore pray to the Lord to he kind
Delivering the Wives of the Brahma!las 165
enough to excuse us because we are simply captivated by His external
energy. We transgressed His order without knowing His transcendental
glories."
The b riihmarws repented for their sinful activities. They wanted to go
personally to offer their obeisances unto Him, but being afraid of Kamsa,
they could not go. In other words, it is very difficult for one to surrender
fully unto the Personality of Godhead without being purified by devotional
service. The example ofthe learned b riihmaras and their wives is vivid. The
wives of the b riihmaras, because they were infused by pure devotional
service, did not care for any kind of opposition. They immediately went
to Kr J}a. But although the b riihmaras had come to know the supremacy
of the Lord and were repenting, they were still afraid of King Kamsa
because they were too addicted to fruitive activities.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twent_y-third Chapter of
Kf J}a, "Delivering the Wives of the Briihmarws Who Performed Sacrifices . "
24 I Worshiping Govardhana Hill
While engaged with the briihmm;tas who were too involved in the
performance of Vedic sacrifices, Krwa and Balarama also saw that the
cowherd men were preparing a similar sacrifice in order to pacify lndra,
the King of heaven , who is responsible for supplying water . As stated in
the Caitanya-caritamrta, a devotee of Kr pa has strong and firm faith in
the understanding that if he is simply engaged in Krwa consciousness and
Krwa's transcendental loving service, then he is freed from all other
obligations. A pure devotee of Lord Kr !la doesn't have to perform any of
the ritualistic functions enj oined in the Vedas ; nor is he required to worship
any demigods. Being a devotee of Lord Krwa , one is understood to have
performed all kinds of Vedic rituals and all kinds of worship to the
demigods. Just by performing the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies or worship
ing the demigods, one does not develop devotional service for Krwa .
But one who is engaged fully in the service of the Lord has already
finished all Vedic injunctions.
Kr pa ordered a stop to all such activities by His devotees, for He wanted
to firmly establish exclusive devotional service during His presence in
V rndavana . Kr pa knew that the cowherd men were preparing for the
lndra sacrifice because He is the omniscient Personality of Godhead , but
as a matter of etiquette, he began to inquire with great honor and
submission from elder personalities like Maharaja Nanda and others.
Krwa asked His father, "My dear father, what is this arrangement going
on for a great sacrifice? What is the result of such sacrifice, and for whom
is it meant? How is it performed? Will you kindly let Me know? I am very
anxious to know this procedure, so please explain to Me the purpose of
this sacrifice . " Upon this inquiry, His father , N anda Maharaja, remained
silent, thinking that his young boy would not be able to understand the
intricacies of performing the yajiia. Krwa, however, persisted : "My dear
166
Worshiping Govardhana Hill 1 67
father, for those who are liberal and saintly, there is no secrecy. They do
not think anyone to be a friend or enemy because they are always open
to everyone . And even for those who are not so lib eral, nothing should be
secret for the family members and friends, although secrecy may be
maintained for persons who are inimical. Therefore you cannot keep any
secrets from Me. All persons are engaged in fruitive activities. Some know
what these activities are, and they know the result , and some execute
activities without knowing the purpose or the result . A person who acts
with full knowledge gets the full result ; one who acts without knowledge
does not get su ch a perfect result. Therefore , please let Me know the
purpose of the sacrifice which you are going to perform . Is it according to
Vedic injunction? Or is it simply a popular ceremony ? Kindly let Me know
in detail about the sacrifice . "
O n hearing this inquiry from Kr§ a , Maharaj a Nanda replied , " M y dear
boy, this ceremonial performance is more or less traditional. Because
rainfall is due to the mercy of King Indra and the clou ds are his represen
tatives, and because water is so important for our living, we mus  show
some gratitude to the controller of this rainfall, Maharaj a Indra. We are
arranging, therefore , to pacify King Indra , b ecause he has very kindly sent
us clouds to pour down sufficient quantity of rain for successful agricul
tural activities. Water is very important ; without rainfall we cannot farm
or produce grains. We cannot live if there is no rainfall . It is necessary for
successful religious ceremonies , economic development, and , ultimately ,
liberation. Therefore we should not give up the traditional ceremonial
function ; if one gives it up, being influenced by lust, or greed or fear,
then it does not look very good for him . "
After hearing this, Kr§ a, the Supreme Personality o f Godhead , in the
presence of His father and all the cowherd men of Vrndavana, spoke in
such a way as to make heavenly King Indra very angry. He suggested
that they forego the sacrifice. His reasons for discouraging the sacrifice
performed to please Indra were twofold. First , as stated in the Bhagavad
gitli, there is no need to worship the demigods for any material advance
ment ; all results deri ved from w orshiping the demigods are simply tem
porary , and only those who are less intelligent are interested with tem
porary results. Secondly , whatever temporary result one derives from
worshiping the demigods is actually granted by the permission of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead . It is clearly stated in the Bhagavad
gitii, mayaiva vihitiin hi tiin. Whatever benefit is supposed to be derived
from the demigods is actually b estowed by the Supreme Personality of
Godhead . Without the permission of the Supreme Personality of Godhead ,
168 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
one cannot bestow any benefit upon others. But sometimes the demigods
become puffed up by the influence of material nature ; thinking themselves
as all in all, they try to forget the supremacy of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. In the Srimad-Bhiigavatam, it is clearly stated that in this
instance Kr t;la wanted to make King Indra angry. Kr  a's advent was
especially meant for the annihilation of the demons and protection of the
devotees. King Indra was certainly a devotee, not a demon, but because he
was puffed up, Kr t;la wanted to teach him a lesson. He first tried to make
Indra angry by stopping the Indra Puja which was arranged by the cow
herd men in Vrndavana.
With this purpose in mind, Krwa began to talk as if He were an atheist
supporting the philosophy of karma-mimfuhsa. Advocates of this type of
philosophy do not accept the supreme authority of the Personality of
Godhead. They put forward the argument that if anyone works nicely,
the result is sure to come. Their opinion is that even if there is a God who
gives man the result of his fruitive activities, there is no need to worship
Him because unless man works He cannot bestow any good result. They
say that instead of worshiping a demigod or God , people should give
attention to their own duties, and thus the good result will surely come.
Lord Kr t;la began to speak to His father according to these principles of
the karma-mimamsa philosophy. "My dear father," He said, "I don't think
you need to worship any demigod for the successful performance of your
agricultural activities. Every living being is born according to his past
karma and leaves this life simply taking the result of his present karma.
Everyone is born in different types or species of life according to his past
activities, and he gets his next birth according to the activities of this life.
Different grades of material happiness and distress, comforts and dis
advantages of life, are different results of different kinds of activities,
either from the past or present life."
Maharaja Nanda and other elderly members argued that without satis
fying the predominating god, one cannot derive any good result simply by
material activities. This is actually the fact. For example, it is sometimes
found that, in spite of first-class medical help and treatment by a first-class
physician, a diseased person dies. It is concluded, therefore, that first-class
medical treatment or the attempts of a first-class physician are not in
themselves the cause for curing a patient ; there must be the hand of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. Similarly, a father's and mother's taking
care of their children is not the cause of the children's comfort. Sometimes
it is found that in spite of all care by the parents, the children go bad or
succumb to death. Therefore material causes are not sufficient for results.
Worshiping Govardhana Hill 169
There must be the sanction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Nanda
Maharaja therefore advocated that, in order to get good results for agricul
tural activities, they must satisfy Indra, the superintending deity of the
rain supply. Lord Kr pa nullified this argument, saying that the demigods
give results only to persons who have executed their prescribed duties.
The demigods cannot give any good results to the person who has not
executed the prescribed duties; therefore demigods are dependent on the
execution of duties and are not absolute in awarding good results to any
one.
"My dear father, there is no need to worship the demigod Indra," Lord
Kr pa said. "Everyone has to achieve the result of his own work. We can
actually see that one becomes busy according to the natural tendency of
his work; and according to that natural tendency, all living entities-either
human beings or demigods-achieve their respective results. All living
entities achieve higher or lower bodies and create enemies, friends or
neutral parties only because of their different kinds of work. One should
be careful to discharge duties according to his natural instinct and not
divert attention to the worship of various demigods. The demigods will be
satisfied by proper execution of all duties, so there is no need to worship
them. Let us, rather, perform our prescribed duties very nicely. Actually
one cannot be happy without executing his proper prescribed duty. One
who does not, therefore, properly discharge his prescribed duties, is com
pared with an unchaste woman. The proper prescribed duty of the
briihmaras is the study of the Vedas; the proper duty of the royal order,
the k§atriyas, is engagement in protecting the citizens; the proper duty of
the vaisya community is agriculture, trade and protection of the cows; and
the proper duty of the sudras is service to the higher classes, namely the
briihmaras, k§atriyas, and vaisyas. We belong to the vaisya community,
and our proper duty is to farm, or to trade with the agricultural produce,
to protect cows, or take to banking."
Kr pa identified Himself with the vaisya community because Nanda
Maharaja was protecting many cows, and Kr pa was taking care of them.
He enumerated four kinds of business engagements . for the vaisya com
munity, namely agriculture, trade, protection of cows and banking. Al
though the vaisyas can take to any of these occupations, the men of
Vrndavana were engaged primarily in the protection of cows.
Kr pa further explained to His father: "This cosmic manifestation is
going on under the influence of three modes of material nature-goodness,
passion, and ignorance. These three modes are the causes of creation,
maintenance, and destruction. The cloud is caused by the action of the
170 Kf  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
mode of passion; therefore it is the mode of passion which causes the
rainfall. And after the rainfall, the living entities derive the result-success
in agricultural work. What, then, has Indra to do in this affair? Even if you
do not please Indra, what can he do? We do not derive any special benefit
from Indra. Even if he is there, he pours water on the ocean also, where
there is no need of water. So he is pouring w ter on the ocean or on the
land ; it does not depend on our worshiping him. As far as we are con
cerned, we do not need to go to another city or village or foreign country.
There are palatial buildings in the cities, but we are satisfied living in this
forest of Vrndavana. Our specific relationship is with Govardhana Hill and
Vrndavana forest and nothing more. I therefore request you, My dear
father, to begin a sacrifice which will satisfy the local briihmar-as and
Govardhana Hill, and let us have nothing to do with Indra."
After hearing this statement by Krwa, Nanda Maharaja replied, "My
dear boy, since You are asking, I shall arrange for a separate sacrifice for
the local briihmar-as and Govardhana Hill. But for the present let me
execute this sacrifice known as Indra-yajna. "
But Kr  a replied, "My dear father, don't delay. The sacrifice you
propose for Govardhana and the local briihmar-as will take much time.
Better take the arrangement and paraphernalia you have already made for
sacrificing Indra-yajfia and immediately engage it to satisfy Govardhana
Hill and the local briihmar-as. "
Maharaja Nanda finally relented. The cowherd men then inquired from
Kr  a how He wanted the yajna performed, and Kr  a gave them the
following directions. "Prepare very nice foodstuffs of all descriptions from
the grains and ghee collected for the yajna. Prepare rice, dahl, then
halavah, piikorii, puri and all kinds of milk preparations like sweet rice,
sweetballs, sandesa, rasagullii and liiflflu and invite the learned briihmaras
who can chant the Vedic hymns and offer oblations to the fire. The
brahmar-as should be given all kinds of grains in charity. Then decorate all
the cows and feed them well. After performing this, give money in charity
to the briihmar-as. As far as the lower animals are concerned, such as the
dogs, and the lower grades of people, such as the car-ralas, or the fifth
class of men who are considered untouchable, they also may be given
sumptuous prasiidam. After giving nice grasses to the cows, the sacrifice
known as Govardhana Pujii may immediately begin. This sacrifice will very
much satisfy Me."
In this statement, Lord Kr  a practically described the whole economy
of the vaisya community. In all communities of human society, and in the
animal kingdom, among the cows, dogs, goats, etc., everyone has his part
Worshiping Govardhana Hill 171
to play. Each is to work in cooperation for the total benefit of all society,
which includes not only animate objects but also inanimate objects like
hills and land. The vaisya community is specifically responsible for the
economic improvement of the society by producing grains, by giving
protection to the cows, by transporting food when needed, and by banking
and finance.
From this statement we learn also that the cats and dogs, although not
so important, are not to be neglected. Cow protection is actually more
important than protection of cats and dogs. Another hint we get from this
statement is that the cii[l iilas or the untouchables are also not to be
neglected by the higher classes. Everyone is important, but some are
directly responsible for the advancement of human society, and some are
only indirectly responsible. However, when Krwa consciousness is there,
then everyone's total benefit is taken care of.
The sacrifice known as Govardhana Piija is observed in the Kr !la
consciousness movement. Lord Caitanya has recommended that since
Kr  a is worshipable, so His land, Vrndavana and Govardhana Hill, are also
worshipable. To confirm this statement, Lord Kr  a said that Govardhana
Piija is as good as worship of Him. From that day, the Govardhana Piija has
been still going on and is known as Annakuta. In all the temples of
Vrndavana or outside of Vrndavana, huge quantities of food are prepared
in this ceremony and are very sumptuously distributed to the general
population. Sometimes the food is thrown to the crowds, and they enjoy
collecting it off the ground. From these instances, we can understand that
prasiidam offered to Kr  a never becomes polluted or contaminated, even
if it is thrown on the ground. The people, therefore, collect it and eat
with great satisfaction.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krwa, therefore advised the
cowherd men to stop the Indra-yajfia and begin the Govardhana Piija in
order to chastise Indra who was very much puffed up at being the supreme
controller of the heavenly planets. The honest and simple cowherd men
headed by Nanda Maharaja accepted Kr  Ja's proposal and executed in
detail everything He advised. They performed Govardhana worship and
circumambulation of the hill. (Following the inauguration of Govardhana
Piija, people in Vrndavana still dress nicely and assemble near Govardhana
Hill to offer worship and circumambulate the hill, leading their cows all
around.) According to the instruction of Lord Krwa, Nanda Maharaja and
the cowherd men called in learned briihmar-as and began to worship
Govardhana Hill by chanting Vedic hymns and offering prasiidam. The
inhabitants of Vrndavana assembled together, decorated their cows and
172 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
gave them grass. Keeping the cows in front, they began to circumambulate
Govardhana Hill. The gopis also dressed themselves very luxuriantly and
sat in bull-driven carts, chanting the glories of Kr  a's pastimes. Assembled
there to act as priests for Govardhana Piija, the briihmar;ws offered their
blessings to the cowherd men and their wives, the gopis. When everything
was complete, Kr  a assumed a great transcendental form and declared to
the inhabitants of Vrndavana that He was Himself Govardhana Hill in order
to convince the devotees that Govardhana Hill and Krwa Himself are
identical. Then Krwa began to eat all the food offered there. The identity
of Kr  a and Govardhana Hill is still honored, and great devotees take
rocks from Govardhana Hill and worship them exactly as they worship the
Deity of Krwa in the temples. Devotees therefore collect small rocks or
pebbles from Govardhana Hill and worship them at home, because this
worship is as good as Deity worship. The form of Krwa who began to eat
the offerings was separately constituted, and Krwa Himself along with
other inhabitants of Vrndavana began to offer obeisances to the Deity as
well as Govardhana Hill. In offering obeisances to the huge form of
Kr  a Himself and Govardhana Hill, Krwa declared, "Just see how
Govardhana Hill has assumed this huge form and is favoring us by accepting
all the offerings." Krwa also declared at that meeting, "One who neglects
the worship of Govardhana Piija, as I am personally conducting it, will not
be happy. There are many snakes on Govardhana Hill, and persons
neglecting the prescribed duty of Govardhana Piija will be bitten by these
snakes and killed. In order to assure the good fortune of the cows and
themselves, all people of Vrndavana near Govardhana must worship the
hill, as prescribed by Me."
Thus performing the Govardhana Piija sacrifice, all the inhabitants of
Vrndavana followed the instructions of Kr  a, the son of Vasudeva, and
afterwards they returned to their respective homes.
Thus e nds the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-fourth Chapter of
Kr  a, "Worshiping Govardhana Hill. "
25 I Devastating Rainfall in Vrndavana
When lndra understood that the sacrifice offered by the cowherd men
in Vrndavana was stopped by Kr J).a, he became angry, and he vented his
anger upon the inhabitants of Vrndavana, who were headed by Nanda
Maharaja, although lndra knew perfectly well that Kf J).a was personally
protecting them. As the director of different kinds of clouds, lndra called
for the siimvartaka. This cloud is invited when there is a need to devastate
the whole cosmic manifestation. The siimvartaka was ordered b y lndra to
go over Vrndavana and inundate the whole area with an extensive flood.
D emonically, lndra thought himself to be the all-powerful supreme per
sonality . When demons become very powerful, they defy the supreme
controller, Personality of Godhead. lndra, though not a demon, was puffed
up by his material position, and he wanted to challenge the supreme
controller. He thought himself, at least for the time being, as powerful as
Kr J).a . lndra said, "Just see the impudence of the inhabitants of Vrndavana !
They are simply inhabitants of the forest , but being infatuated with their
friend Kr J).a , who is nothing but an ordinary human being, they have
dared to defy the demigods . "
Kf J).a has declared i n the Bhagavad-gitii that the worshipers o f the
demigods are not very intelligent. He has also declared that one has to give
up all kinds of worship and simply concentrate on Kf J).a consciousness.
Kr J).a's invoking the anger of lndra and later on chastising him is a clear
indication to His devotee that those who are engaged in Kf J).a consciousness
have no need to worship any demigod, even if it is found that the demigod
has become angry. Kr J).a gives His devotees all protection, and they should
completely depend on His mercy .
lndra cursed the action of the inhabitants of Vrndavana and said, "By
defying the authority of the demigods, the inhabitants of v rndavana will
suffer in material existence. Having neglected the sacrifice to the demigods,
1 73
174 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
they cannot cross over the impediments of the ocean of material misery."
Indra further declared, "These cowherd men in Vrndavana have neglected
my authority on the advice of this talkative boy who is known as Kr  a.
He is nothing but a child, and by believing this child, they have enraged
me." Thus he ordered the siiriwartaka cloud to go and destroy the
prosperity of Vrndavana. "The men of Vrndavana," said Indra, "have
become too puffed up over their material opulence and their confidence
in the presence of their tiny friend, Kr  Ja. He is simply talkative, childish,
and unaware of the complete cosmic situation, althgugh He is thinking
Himself very advanced in knowledge. Because they have taken Kn a so
seriously, they must be punished, and so I have ordered the siiriwartaka
cloud to go there and inundate the place. They should be destroyed with
their cows."
It is indicated here that in the villages or outside the towns, the
inhabitants must depend on the cows for their prosperity. When the cows
are destroyed, the people are destitute of all kinds of opulences. When
King Indra ordered the siiriwartaka and companion clouds to go to
Vrndavana, the clouds were afraid of the assignment. But King Indra
assured them, "You go ahead, and I will also go, riding on my elephant,
accompanied by great storms. And I shall apply all my strength to punish
the inhabitants of v rndavana."
Ordered by King Indra, all the dangerous clouds appeared above Vrnda
vana and began to pour water incessantly, with all their strength and
power. There was constant lightning and thunder, blowing of severe wind
and incessant falling of rain. The rainfall seemed to fall like piercing sharp
arrows. By pouring water as thick as pillars, without cessation, the clouds
gradually filled all the lands in Vrndavana with water, and there was no
visible distinction between higher and lower land. The situation was very
dangerous, especially for the animals. The rainfall was accompanied by
great winds, and every living creature in Vrndavana began to tremble from
the severe cold. Unable to find any other source of deliverance, they all
approached Govinda to take shelter at His lotus feet. The cows especially,
being much aggrieved from the. heavy rain, bowed down their heads, and
taking their calves underneath their bodies, they approached the Supreme
Personality of Godhead to take shelter of His lotus feet. At that time all the
inhabitants of Vrndavana began to pray to Lord Krwa. "Dear Kr !J.a," they
prayed, "You are all-powerful, and Y ou are very affectionate to Y our devo
tees. Now please protect us who have been much harrassed by angry Indra."
Upon hearing their prayer, Kr  a could also understand that Indra,
being bereft of his sacrificial honor, was pouring down rain that was
Devastating Rainfall in V rndavana 1 75
accompanied by heavy pieces of ice and strong winds, although all this
was out of season. Kr§I;J.a understood that this was a deliberate exhibition
of anger by Indra. He therefore concluded, "This demigod who thinks
himself supreme has shown his great power, but I shall answer him
according to My position, and I shall teach him that he is not autonomous
in managing universal affairs. I am the Supreme Lord over all, and I shall
thus take away his false prestige which has risen from his power. The
demigods are My devotees, and therefore it is not possible for them to
forget My supremacy, but somehow or other he has become puffed up
with material power and thus is now maddened. I shall act in such a way
to relieve him of this false prestige. I shall give protection to My pure
devotees in Vrndavana, who are at present completely at My mercy and
whom I have taken completely under My protection. I will save them by
My mystic power."
Thinking in this way, Lord Kr§I;Ia immediately picked up Govardhana
Hill with one hand, exactly as a child picks up a mushroom from the
ground. Thus He exhibited His transcendental pastime of lifting Govar
dhana Hill. Lord Kr§I;Ia then began to address His devotees, "My dear
brothers, My dear father, My dear inhabitants of Vrndavana, you can now
safely enter under the umbrella of Govardhana Hill, which I have just
lifted. Do not be afraid of the hill and think that it will fall from My hand.
You have been too much afflicted from the heavy rain and strong wind;
therefore I have lifted this hill, which will protect you exactly like a huge
umbrella. I think this is a proper arrangement to relieve you from your
immediate distress. Be happy along with your animals underneath this
great umbrella." Being assured by Lord Kr§I;J.a, all the inhabitants of
vrndavana entered beneath the great hill and appeared to be safe along
with their property and animals.
The inhabitants of Vrndavana and their animals remained there for one
week without being disturbed by hunger, thirst or any other discomforts.
They were simply astonished to see how Kf§I;J.a was holding up the
mountain with the little finger of His left hand. Seeing the extraordinary
mystic power of Kr I;J.a, Indra, the King of heaven, was thunderstruck and
baffled in his determination. He immediately called for all the clouds and
asked them to desist. When the sky became completely cleared of all
clouds and there was sunrise again, the strong winds stopped. At that time
Kr§I;J.a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, known now as the lifter of
Govardhana Hill, said, "My dear cowherd men, now you can leave and
take your wives, children, cows and valuables, because everything is ended.
The inundation has gone down, along with the swelling waters of the river."
176 Kf  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
All the men loaded their valuables on carts and slowly left with their
cows and other paraphernalia. After they had cleared out everything, Lord
Kr lJa very slowly replaced Govardhana Hill exactly in the same position
as it had been before. When everything was done, all the inhabitants of
Vrndavana approached Kr JJa and embraced Him with great ecstacy. The
gopis, being naturally very affectionate to Kr  a, began to offer Him curd
mixed with their tears, and they poured incessant blessings upon Him.
Mother Y asoda, mother RohiJJi, N anda, and Balarama, who is the strongest
of the strong, embraced Kr JJa one after another and, from spontaneous
feelings of affection, blessed Him over and over again. In the heavens,
different demigods from different planetary systems, such as Siddhaloka,
Gandharvaloka and CaraJJaloka, also began to show their complete satis
faction. They poured showers of flowers on the surface of the earth and
sounded different conchshells. There was beating of drums, and being
inspired by godly feelings, residents of Gandharvaloka began to play on
their tampouras to please the Lord. After this incident, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, surrounded by His dear friends and animals,
returned to His home. As usual, the gopis began to chant the glorious
pastimes of Lord Krwa with great feeling, for they were chanting from
the heart.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-fifth Chapter of
Krwa, "Devastating Rainfall in Vrndavana. "
26 I Wonderful Krsna• • •
Without understanding the intricacies of Kf l).a, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead , and without knowing His uncommon spiritual opulences, the
innocent cowherd boys and men of Vrndavana began to discuss the
wonderful activities of Kr  ta which surpass the activities of all men.
One of them said , "My dear friends, considering His wonderful activities,
how is it possible that such an uncommon boy woold come and live with
us in Vrndavana? It is really not possible. Just imagine ! He is now only
seven years old ! How was it possible for Him to lift Govardhana Hill in
one hand and hold it up just like the king of elephants holds a lotus flower?
To lift a lotus flower is a most insignificant thing for an elephant, and
similarly Kf l).a lifted Govardhana Hill without exertion. When He was
simply a small baby and could not even see properly, He killed a great
demon, Piitana. While sucking her breast, He also sucked out her life·air.
Kf l).a killed the Piitana demon exactly as eternal time kills a living
creature in due course. When He was only three months old , He was
sleeping underneath a hand-driven cart. Being hungry for His mother's
breast , He began to cry and throw His legs upwards. And from the kicking
of his small feet the cart immediately broke apart and fell to pieces. When
He was only one year old , He was carried away by the Trl).avarta demon
disguised as a whirlwind, and although He was taken very high in the sky,
He simply hung on the neck of the demon and forced him to fall from the
sky and immediately die. Once His mother , being disturbed by His stealing
butter, tied Him to a wooden mortar, and the child pushed it towards a
pair of trees known as _yamala arjuna and caused them to fall. Once, when
He was engaged in tending the calves in the forest along with His elder
brother, Balarama, a demon named Bakasura appeared, and Kf l).a at once
bifurcated the demon's beaks. When the demon known as V atsasura
entered among the calves tended by Kf l).a with a desire to kill Him, He
1 77
1 78 K[ J}a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
immediately detected the demon, killed him, and threw him into a tree.
When Kf§ a, along with His brother, Balarama, entered the Talavana
forest, the demon known as Dhenukasura, in the shape of an ass, attacked
Them and was immediately killed by Balarama, who caught his hind legs
and threw him in a palm tree. Although the D henukasura demon was
assisted by his cohorts, also in the shape of asses, all were killed, and the
Talavana forest was then open for the use of the animals and inhabitants of
Vrndavana. When Pralambasura entered amongst His cowherd boy friends,
He caused his death by Balarama. Thereafter, Kr  a saved His friends and
cows from the severe forest fire, and He chastised the Kaliya serpent in
the lake of Yamuna and forced him to leave the vicinity of the Yamuna
River ; He thereby made the water of the Yamuna poisonless. ''
Another one of the friends of Nanda Maharaja said, "My dear Nanda,
we do not know why we are so attracted by your son Kn a. We want to
forget Him, but this is impossible. Why are we so naturally affectionate
toward Him? Just imagine how wonderful it is! On one hand He is only
a boy of seven years old, and on the other hand there is a huge hill like
Govardhana Hill, and He lifted it so easily! 0 Nanda Maharaja, we are now
in great doubt-your son Kn a must be one of the demigods. He is not at
all an ordinary boy. Maybe He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead."
On hearing the praises of the cowherd men in Vrndavana, King Nanda
said, "My dear friends, in reply to you I can simply present the statement
of Gargamuni so that your doubts may be cleared. When he came to
perform the name-giving ceremony, he said that this boy descends in
different periods of time in different colors and that this time He has
appeared in Vrndavana in a dark color and is known as Krwa. Previously,
He has white color, then red color, then yellow color. He also said that
this boy was once the son of Vasudeva, and everyone who knows of His
previous birth calls Him Vasudeva. Actually he said that my son has many
varieties of names, according to His different qualities and activities.
Gargacarya assured me that this boy will be all-auspicious for my family
and that He will be able to give transcendental blissful pleasure to all the
cowherd men and cows in Vrndavana. Even though we will be put into
various kinds of difficulties, by the grace of this boy we will be very
easily freed from them. He also said that formerly this boy saved the world
from an unregulated condition, and He saved all honest men from the hands
of the dishonest. He also said that any fortunate man who becomes at
tached to this boy, Kn.pa, is never vanquished or defeated by his enemy.
On the whole, He is exactly like Lord Vi  u, who always takes the side of
the demigods, who are consequently never defeated by the demons.
Wonderful KH a 179
Gargacarya thus concluded that my child will grow to be exactly like
Vi  u in transcendental beauty, qualification, activities, influence and
opulence, and so we should not be very astonished by His wonderful
activities. After telling me this, Gargacarya returned home, and since then
we have been continually seeing the wonderful activities of this child.
According to the version of Gargacarya, I consider that He must be
Naraya a Himself, or maybe a plenary portion of Naraya a.''
When all the cowherd men very attentively heard the statements of
Gargacarya through N anda Maharaja, they better appreciated the wonderful
activities of Kr  a and became very jubilant and satisfied. They began to
praise Nanda Maharaja, because by consulting him their doubts about
Kr  a were cleared. They said, "Let Kr  a, who is so kind, beautiful and
merciful, protect us. When angry Indra sent torrents of rain, accompanied
by showers of ice blocks and high wind, He immediately took compassion
upon us and saved us and our families, cows and valuable possessions by
picking up the Govardhana Hill, just as a child picks up a mushroom. He
saved us so wonderfully. May He continue to mercifully glance over us and
our cows. May we live peacefully under the protection of wonderful
Krsna. "
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-sixth Chapter of
Kr  a, "Wonderful Knr-a. "
When Kr !la saved the inhabitants of V rndavana from the wrath of Indra
by lifting Govardhana Hill, a surabhi cow from Goloka Vrndavana, as well
as King Indra from the heavenly planet, appeared before Him. Indra, the
King of heaven, was conscious of his offence before Kr !la ; therefore he
stealthily appeared before Him from a secluded place. He immediately fell
down at the lotus feet of Kr !la, although his own crown was dazzling like
sunshine. Indra knew about the exalted position of Kr !la because Kr !la
is the master of Indra, but he could not believe that Kr !la could come
down and live in V rndavana among the cowherd men. When Kr !la defied
the authority of Indra, Indra became angry because he thought that he was
all in all within this universe and that no one was as powerful as he. But
after this incident, his false puffed up prestige was destroyed. Being con
scious of his subordinate position, he appeared before Kr pa with folded
hands and began to offer the following prayers.
" My dear Lord , " Indra said, "being puffed up by my false prestige , I
thought that You had offended me b y not allowing the cowherd men to
perform the Indra-yajna, and I thought that You wanted to enj oy the
offerings that were arranged for the sacrifice . I thought that in the name of
a Govardhana sacrifice , You were taking my share of profit, and therefore
I mistook Your position. N ow by Your grace I can understand that You
are the Supreme Lord, Personality of Godhead, and that You are transcen
dental to all the material qualities. Your transcendental position is
visuddha-saUvam, which is above the platform of the material mode of
goodness, and Y our transcendental ab ode is beyond the disturbance of
the material qualities. Your name , fame, form, quality and pastimes are
all beyond this material nature, and they are never disturbed by the three
material modes. Your abode is accessible only for one who undergoes
severe austerities and penances and who is completely freed from the
180
Prayers by Indra, the King of Heaven 181
onslaught of material qualities like passion and ignorance. If someone
thinks that when You come within this material world You accept the
modes of material nature, he is mistaken. The webs of the material quali
ties are never able to touch You, and You certainly do not accept them
when You are present within this world. Your Lordship is never condi
tioned by the laws of material nature.
"My dear Lord, You are the original father of this cosmic manifestation.
You are the supreme spiritual master of this cosmic world, and You are
the original proprietor of everything. As eternal time, You are competent
to chastise offenders. Within this material world there are many fools like
myself who consider themselves to be the Supreme Lord or the all in all
within the universe. You are so merciful that without punishing their
offenses, You devise means so that their false prestige is subdued and they
can know that You, and none else, are the Supreme Personality of God
head.
"My dear Lord, You are the supreme father, the supreme spiritual
master and supreme king. Therefore, You have the right to chastise all
living entities whenever there is any discrepancy in their behavior. The
father, the spiritual master, and the supreme executive officer of the state
are always well-wishers of their sons, their students and their citizens
respectively. As such, the well-wishers have the right to chastise their
dependents. By Your own desire You appear auspiciously on the earth in
Your eternal varieties of forms; You come to glorify the earthly planet
and specifically to chastise persons who are falsely claiming to b e God. In
the material world there is regular competition between different types of
living entities to become supreme leaders of society, and after being
frustrated in achieving the supreme positions of leadership, foolish persons
claim to be God, the Supreme Personality. There are many such foolish
personalities in this world, like me, but in due course of time, when they
come to their senses, they surrender unto You and again engage them
selves properly by rendering service unto You. And that is the purpose of
Your chastising persons envious of You.
"My dear Lord, I committed a great offense unto Your lotus feet, being
falsely proud of my material opulences, not knowing Your unlimited
power. Therefore, my Lord, kindly excuse me, because I am fool number
one. Kindly give me Your blessings so that I may not act so foolishly again.
If You think, my Lord, that the offence is very great and cannot be
excused, then I appeal to You that I am Your eternal servant; Your
appearance in this world is to give protection to your eternal servants and
to destroy the demons who maintain great military strength just to burden
182 Kf J)a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
the very existence of the earth. As I am Your eternal servant, kindly excuse
me.
"My dear Lord, You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I offer
my respectful obeisances unto You because You are the Supreme Person
and the Supreme Soul. You are the son of Vasudeva, and You are the
Supreme Lord, Krwa, the master of all pure devotees. Please accept my
prostrated obeisances. You are the personification of supreme knowledge.
You can appear anywhere according to Your desire in any one of Your
eternal forms. You are the root of all creation and the Supreme Soul of all
living entities. Due to my gross ignorance, I created great disturbance in
V rndavana by sending torrents of rain and heavy hailstorm. I acted out of,
severe anger caused by Your stopping the sacrifice which was to be held to
satisfy me. But my dear Lord, You are so kind to me that You have
bestowed Your mercy upon me by destroying all my false pride. ! therefore
take shelter unto Your lotus feet. My dear Lord, You are not only the
supreme controller, but also the spiritual master of all li ving entities."
Thus praised by Indra, Lord Krwa, the Supreme Personality of God
head, smiling beautifully, said, "My dear Indra, I have stopped your
sacrifice just to show My causeless mercy and to revive your memory that
I am your eternal master. I am not only your master, but I am the master
of all the other demigods as well. You should always remember that all
your material opulences are due to My mercy. Everyone should always
remember that I am the Supreme Lord. I can show anyone My favor, and
I can chastise anyone, because no one is superior to Me. If I find someone
overpowered by false pride, in order to show him My causeless mercy, I
withdraw all his opulences."
It is noteworthy that Kr l)a sometimes removes all opulences in order
to facilitate a rich man's becoming a surrendered soul to Him. This is a
special favor of the Lord's. Sometimes it is seen that a person is very
opulent materially, but due to his devotional service to the Lord, he may
be reduced to poverty. One should not think, however, that because he
worshiped the Supreme Lord he became poverty-stricken. The real pur
port is that when a person is a pure devotee, but at the same time, by
miscalculation, he wants to lord it over material nature, the Lord shows
His special mercy by taking away all material opulences until at last he
surrenders unto the Supreme Lord.
After instructing Indra, Lord Kr l/a asked him to return to his kingdom
in the heavenly planet and to remember always that he is never the supreme
but is always subordinate to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He also
advised him to remain as King of heaven, but to be careful of false pride.
After this, the transcendental surabhi cow, who also came with Indra to
see Kr  a, offered her respectful obeisances unto Him and worshiped Him.
Prayers by Indra, the King of Heaven 183
The surabhi offered her prayer as follows. "My dear Lord Kr  a, You are
the most powerful of all mystic yogis because You are the soul of the
complete universe, and from You only all this cosmic manifestation has
taken place. Therefore, although Indra tried his best to kill my descendant
cows in Vrndavana, they remained under Your shelter, and You have
protected them all so well. We do not know anyone else as the Supreme,
nor do we go to any other god or demigods for protection. Therefore, You
are our Indra, You are the Supreme Father of the whole cosmic manifesta
tion, and You are the protector and elevator of all the cows, briihmaras,
demigods and others who are pure devotees - f Your Lordship. 0 Supersoul
of the universe, let us bathe You with our milk because You are our Indra.
0 Lord, You appear just to diminish the burden of impure activities on-the
earth."
In this way, Kr  a was bathed by the milk of the surabhi cows, and
Indra was bathed by the water of the celestial Ganges through the trunk of
his carrier elephant. After this, the heavenly King Indra, along with
surabhi cows and all other demigods and their mothers, worshiped Lord
Kr  a by bathing Him with Ganges water and the milk of the surabhis.
Thus Govinda, Lord KH a, was pleased with all of them. The residents of
all higher planetary systems, such as Gandharvaloka, Pitrloka, Siddhaloka,
and Cara aloka, all combined and began to glorify the Lord by chanting
His holy name. Their wives and damsels began to dance with great joy.
They very much satisfied the Lord by incessantly pouring flowers from the
sky. When everything was very nicely and j oyfully settled, the cows over
flooded the surface of the earth with their milk. The water of the rivers
began to flow and give nourishment to the trees, producing fruits and
flowers of different colors and taste. The trees began to pour drops of
honey. The hills and mountains began to produce potent medicinal plants
and valuable stones. Because of Krwa's presence, all these things happened
very nicely, and the lower animals, who were generally envious, were
envious no longer.
After satisfying Kr  a, who is the Lord of all the cows in Vrndavana,
who is known as Govinda, King Indra took His permission to return to his
heavenly kingdom. He was surrounded by all kinds of demigods who
passed with him through cosmic space. This great incident is a powerful
example of how Kr  a consciousness can benefit the world. Even the lower
animals forget their envious nature and become elevated to the qualities
of the demigods.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-seventh Chapter of
Kr va, "Prayers by Indra, the King of Heaven. "
28 I Releasing N anda Maharaj a
from the Clutches o f V aruna
The Govardhana Ceremony took place on the new moon day. After this,
there were torrents of rain and hailstorms imposed by King lndra for seven
days. Nine days of the waxing moon having passed , on the tenth day King
lndra worshiped Lord Krwa, and thus the matter was satisfactorily settled.
After this, on the eleventh day of the full moon, there was Ekiidasi.
Maharaj a Nanda observed fasting for the whole day, and just early in the
morning of the Dviidasi, the day after Ekiidasi, he went to take b ath in the
River Y am una. He entered deep into the water of the river, but he was
arrested immediately by one of the servants of V aruJ;ladeva. These servants
brought Nanda Maharaj a before the demigod VaruJ;la and accused him of
taking a bath in the river at the wrong time. According to astronomical
calculations, the time in which he took bath was considered demoniac. The
fact was, Nanda Maharaj a wanted to take a bath in the River Y amuna
early in the morning before the sunrise, but somehow or other he was a
little too early, and he bathed at an inauspicious time. C onsequently he
was arrested.
When Nanda Maharaj a was taken away by V aruJ;la's servants, his com
panions began to call loudly for Kf J;la and Balarama. Immediately Kf J;la
and Balarama could understand that Nanda Maharaj a was taken by
V aruJ;la, and thus They went to the abode of V aruJ;la, for They were
pledged to give protection. The inhabitants of Vrndavana, the unalloyed
devotees of the Lord, having no shelter other than the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, naturally cried to Him for help , exactly like children who
do not know anything but the protection of their parents. D emigod
V aruJ;la received Lord Kr J;la and Balarama with great respect and said,
"My dear Lord , actually at this very moment, because of Your presence, I
am materially defeated. Although I am the proprietor of all the treasures in
the water , I know that such possessions do not make for a successful life.
184
The god of the waters was holding N anda captive underneath the sea. ( p . 1 84)

The gopis remembered their pastimes with Kr !la· ( p .   0 8 )

The wives of the b riih mm:ws saw the Su preme Personality of G o dhead , and lie en lercd
within their hearts through their eyes. ( p . 1 60 )

Kr p.a, the supreme enj oyer, desired to enj oy the company of the gopis. (p. 1 90 )
O t i l o f m a n y Lhousa n ds of gopis, Radhara ii is the most p rominent. ( p . 2 1 1 )
Releasing Nanda Maharaja From the Clutches of Varul}a 185
But this moment, as I look at You, my life is made completely successful
because by seeing You I no longer have to accept a material body. There
fore, 0 Lord, Supreme Personality of Godhead, Supreme Brahman and
Supersoul of everything, let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.
You are the supreme transcendental personality; there.is no possibility of
imposing the influence of material nature upon You. I am very sorry that
by being foolish, by not knowing what to do or what not to do, I have
mistakenly arrested Your father, Nanda Maharaja. So I beg Your pardon
for the offence of my servants. I think that it was Your plan to show me
Your mercy by Your personal presence here. My dear Lord Kr§ a, Govinda,
be merciful upon me-here is Your father. You can take him back imme
diately. "
In this way Lord Krwa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, rescued
His father and presented him before his friends with great jubilation. Nanda
Maharaja was surprised that, although the demigod was so opulent, he
offered such respect to Kr§!la. That was very astonishing to Nanda, and he
began to describe the incident to his friends and relatives with great
wonder.
Actually, although Kr§ a was acting so wonderfully, Maharaja Nanda
and mother Y asoda could not think of Him as the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Instead, they always accepted Him as their beloved child. Thus
Nanda Maharaja did not accept the fact that Varu9a worshiped Kr§ a
because Krwa was the Supreme Personality of Godhead ; rather he took it
that because Krwa was such a wonderful child He was respected even by
Varu9a. The friends of Nanda Maharaja, all the cowherd men, became
eager to know if Krwa were actually the Supreme Personality and if He
were going to give them all salvation. When they were all thus consulting
among themselves, Kr  1a understood their minds, and in order to assure
them of their destiny in the spiritual kingdom, He showed them the
spiritual sky. Generally, ordinary persons are engaged simply in working
hard in the material world, and they have no information that there is
another kingdom or another sky, which is known as the spiritual sky,
where life is eternal, blissful, and full of knowledge. As it is stated in the
Bhagavad-gitii, a person returning to that spiritual sky never returns to this
material world of death and suffering.
Krwa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is always anxious to give
information to the conditioned soul that there is a spiritual sky far, far
beyond this material sky, transcendental to the innumerable universes
created within the total material energy. Kr  a is, of course, always very
kind to every conditioned soul, but, as stated in the Bhagavad-gita, He is
186 Kr !la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
especially inclined to the devotees. Hearing their inquiries, Kr !la imme
diately thought that His devotees in V rndavana should be informed of the
spiritual sky and the Vaiku tha planets therein. Within the material world,
every conditioned soul is in the darkness of ignorance. This means that all
conditioned souls are under the concept of this bodily existence.
E eryone is under the impression that he is of this material world, and
with this concept of life, everyone is working in ignorance in different
forms of life. The activities of the particular type of body are called karma,
or fruitive action. All conditioned souls under the impression of the bodily
concept are working according to their particular types of body. These
activities are creating their future conditional life. Because they have very
little information of the spiritual world, they do not generally take to
spiritual activities, which are called bhakti-yoga. Those who successfully
practice bhakti-yoga, after giving up this present body, go directly to the
spiritual world and become situated in one of the V aiku tha planets. The
inhabitants of V rndavana are all pure devotees. Their destination after
quitting the body is Kr  aloka. They even surpass the V aiku thalokas. The
fact is, those who are always engaged in Kr !la consciousness and mature,
pure devotional service are given the chance, after death, to gain Kr !la 's
association in the universes within the material world. Kr !la's pastimes are
continually going on, either in this universe or in another universe. Just as
the sun globe is passing through many places across this earthly planet, so
Knrw-lilii, or the transcendental advent and pastimes of Kr !la, are also
going on continually, either in this or another universe. The mature
devotees, who have completely executed Kr !la consciousness, are imme
diately transferred to the universe where Kr !la is appearing. In that uni
verse the devotees get their first opportunity to associate with Krwa
personally and directly. The training goes on, as we see in the Vrndavana
lilii of Krwa within this planet. Kr  a therefore revealed the actual feature
of the Vaiku!ltha planets so that the inhabitants of Vrndavana could know
their destination.
Thus Kr  a showed them the eternal ever-existing spiritual sky which is
unlimited and full of knowledge. Within this material world there are
different gradations of forms, and according to the gradations, knowledge
is proportionately manifested. For example, the knowledge in the body of
a child is not as perfect as the knowledge in the body of an adult man_
Everywhere there are different gradations of living entities, in aquatic
animals, in the plants and trees, in the reptiles and insects, in birds and
beasts and in the civilized and uncivilized human forms of life. Above the
human form of life there are demigods, Cara!las and Siddhas on up to
Releasing Nanda Maharaja from the Clutches of Vam'!a 187
Brahmaloka where Lord Brahma lives, and among these demigods there
are always different gradations of knowledge. But past this material world,
in the Vaiku tha sky, everyone is in full knowledge. All the living entities
there are engaged in devotional service to the Lord, either in the Vaiku tha
planets or in Kr  aloka.
As it is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita, full knowledge means knowing
Kr  a to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the Vedas and
Bhagavad-gita it is also stated that in the brahmajjoti or spiritual sky
there is no need of sunlight, moonlight, or electricity. All those planets are
self-illuminating, and all of them are eternally situated. There is no ques
tion of creation and annihilation in the brahmajyoti, spiritual sky.
Bhagavad-gita also confirms that beyond the material sky there is another
eternal spiritual sky where everything is eternally existing. Information of
the spiritual sky can be had only from great sages and saintly persons who
have already surpassed the influence of the three material modes of nature.
Unless one is constantly situated on that transcendental platform, it is not
possible to understand the spiritual nature.
Therefore it is recommended that one should take to bhakti-yoga and
keep himself engaged twenty-four hours in Kr  a consciousness, which
places one beyond the reach of the modes of material nature. One in
Kr  a consciousness can easily understand the nature of the spiritual sky
and Vaiku thaloka. The inhabitants of Vrndavana, being always engaged
in Kr  a consciousness, could therefore very easily understand the tran
scendental nature of the V aiku thalokas.
Thus Kr  a led all the cowherd men, headed by Nanda Maharaja, to the
lake where Akriira was later shown the Vaiku tha planetary system. They
took their bath immediately and saw the real nature of the Vaiku thalokas.
After seeing the spiritual sky and the Vaiku thalokas, all the men, headed
by Nanda Maharaja, felt wonderfully blissful, and coming out of the river,
they saw Kn a, who was being worshiped with excellent prayers.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-eighth Chapter of
Kr  a, "Releasing Nanda Maharaja from the Clutches of Varup,a. "
29 I The Rasa Dance : Introduction
In the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated the rasa dance took place on the
full moon night of the sarat season. From the statement of previous
chapters, it appears that the festival of Govardhana Piij a was performed
just after the dark moon night of the month of Karttika , and thereafter
the ceremony of Bhratrdvitiya was performed ; then the wrath of lndra was
exhibited in the shape of torrents of rain and hailstorm , and L ord Kr  a
held up Govardhana Hill for seven days , up until the ninth day of the
moon. Thereafter, on the tenth day, the inhabitants of V rndavana were
talking amongst themselves about the wonderful activities of Kr  a, and
the next day, Ekadasi was observed by N anda Maharaja. On the next day,
Dvadasi, Nanda Maharaj a went to take a bath in the Ganges and was
arrested by the men of V aru a ; then he was released by Lord Kr  a. Then
Nanda Maharaj a , along with the cowherd men, was shown the spiritual sky.
In this way, the full moon night of sarat season came to an end. The full
moon night of Asvina is called sarad-piin;tima. It appears from the state
ment of Srimad-Bhagavatam that Kr  a had to wait another year for such
a moon before enj oying the rasa dance with the gopis. At the age of seven
years , He lifted Govardhana Hill. Therefore , the rasa dance took place
during His eighth year.
From Vedic literature it appears that when a theatrical actor dances
among many dancing girls , the group-dance is called a rasa dance. When
Kr  a saw the full moon night of the sarat season, He decorated Himself
with various seasonal flowers, especially the mallika flowers, which are very
fragrant. He remembered the go pis ' prayers to goddess Katyayani, wherein
they prayed for Kr  a to be their husband. He thought that the full night
of the sarat season was just suitable for a nice dance. So their desire to
have Krsna as their husband would then be fulfilled.
The .  ords used in this connection in the Srimad-Bhagavatam are
188
The Rasa Dance: Introduction 189
bhagavan api. This means that although Kr  a is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, He has no desire that needs to be fulfilled because He is
always full with six opulences. Yet He wanted to enjoy the company of
the gopis. Bhagavan api signifies that this is not like the ordinary dancing
of young boys and young girls. The specific word used in the Srimad
Bhagavatam is yogamayam upasrita[!,, which means that this dancing with
the gopi..  is on the platform of yogamaya, not mahamaya. The dancing of
young boys and girls within this material world is in the kingdom of
mahamaya, or the external energy. The rasa dance of Kr  a with the gopis
is on the platform of yogamaya. The difference between the platform of
yogamaya and mahamaya is compared in the Caitanya-caritamrta to the
difference between gold and iron. From the viewpoint of metallurgy,
gold and iron are both metals, but the quality is completely different.
Similarly, although the rasa dance and Lord Kr  a's association with the
gopis appear like the ordinary mixing of young boys and girls·, the
quality is completely different. The difference is appreciated by great
Vai  avas because they can understand the difference between love of
Krwa and lust.
On the mahamaya platform, dances take place on the basis of sense
gratification. But when Kf l}a called the gopis by sounding His flute, the
gopis very hurriedly rushed towards the spot of rasa dance with the
transcendental desire of satisfying Kf J}a. The author of Caitanya
caritamrta, Kf l}adasa Kaviraja Gosvami, has explained that lust means
sense gratification, and love also means sense gratification-but for Kr  a.
In other words, when activities are enacted on the platform of personal
sense gratification, they are called material activities, but when they are
enacted for the satisfaction of Kf J}a, then they are spiritual activities. On
any platform of activities, the principle of sense gratification is there. But
on the spiritual platform, sense gratification is for the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, Kr  a, whereas on the material platform it is for the per
former. For example, on the material platform, when a servant serves a
master, he is not trying to satisfy the senses of the master, but rather his
own senses. The servant would not serve the master if the payment stopped.
That means that the servant engages himself in the service of the master
just to satisfy his senses. On the spiritual platform, the servitor of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead serves Kr  a without payment, and he
continues his service in all conditions. That is the difference between
Kr  a consciousness and material consciousness.
It appears that Kr  a enjoyed the rasa dance with the gopis when He
was eight years old. At that time, many of the gopis were married, because
190 Kf ')a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in India, especially in those days, girls were married at a very early age.
There are even many instances of a girl giving birth to a child at the age of
twelve . Under the circumstances, all the gopis who wanted to h ave Kr !la
as their husband were already married. At the same time, they continued
to hope that Kr§!la would be their husband. Their attitude toward K[§')a
was that of paramour love. Therefore, the loving affairs of K[§l)a with the
gopis is called parakiya-rasa. A married man or a wife who desires another
wife or husband is called parakiya-rasa.
Actually , Kf§l)a is the husband of everyone because He is the supreme
enj oyer. The gopis wanted K[§l)a to be their husband, but factually there
was no possibility of His marrying all the gopis. But because they had that
natural tendency to accept Kr  ta as their supreme husband, the relation
ship between the gopis and Kr va is called parakiya-rasa. This parak iya-rasa
is ever-existent in Goloka Vrndavana in the spiritual sky where there is no
possibility of the inebriety which characterizes parakiya-rasa in the material
world. In the material world, parakiya-rasa is abominable, whereas in the
spiritual world it is present in the superexcellent relationship of Kr§tla and
the gopis. There are many other relationships with Kf§l)a: master and
servant , friends and friend, parent and son, and lover and beloved. Out of
all these rasas, the parakiya-rasa is considered to be the topmost .
This material world is the perverted reflection of the spiritual worl d ; it
is j ust like the reflection of a tree on the bank of a reservoir of water : the
topmost part of the tree is seen as the lowest part. Similarly , parakiya-rasa,
when pervertedly reflected in this material world, is abominable. When
people, therefore, imitate the rasa dance of Kr§!la with the gopis, they
simply enj oy the perverted, abominable reflection of the transcendental
parak iya-rasa. There is no possibility of enj oying this transcendental
parakiya-rasa within the material world. It is stated in the Srimad
Bhagavatam that one should not imitate this parakiya-rasa even in dream
or imagination . Those who do so drink the most deadly poison.
When K[§l)a, the supreme enj oyer , desired to enj oy the company of the
gopis on that full moon night of the sarat season, exactly at that very
moment , the moon, the lord of the stars, appeared in the sky , displaying
its most beautiful features. The full moon night of the sarat season is the
most beautiful night in the year . In India there is a grea t monu ment called
Taj Mahal in Agra, a city in the Uttar Pradesh province, and the tomb is
made of first-class marble stone. During the night of the full moon of the
sarat season, many foreigners go to see the beautiful reflections of the
moon on the tomb . Thus this full moon night is celebrated even today for
its beauty .
The Rasa Dance: Introduction 191
When the full moon rose in the east, it tinged everything with a reddish
color. With the rising of the moon, the whole sky appeared smeared by red
kunkuma. When a husband long separated from his wife returns home, he
decorates the face of his wife with red kunkuma. This long-expected
moonrise of the sarat season was thus smearing the eastern sky.
The appearance of the moon increased Krwa's desire to dance with the
gopis. The forests were filled with fragrant flowers. The atmosphere was
cooling and festive. When Lord Kr  a began to blow His flute, the gopis
all over V rndavana became enchanted. Their attraction to the vibration of
the flute increased a thousand times due to the rising full moon, the red
horizon, the calm and cool atmosphere, and the blossoming flowers. All
these gopis were by nature very much attracted to Krwa's beauty, and
when they heard the vibration of His flute, they became apparently lustful
to satisfy the senses of Kr  1a.
Immediately upon hearing the vibration of the flute, they all left their
respective engagements and proceeded to the spot where Kr va was
standing. While they ran very swiftly, all their earrings swung back and
forth. They all rushed toward the place known as V amsivata. Some of
them were engaged in milking cows, but they left their milking business
half finished and immediately went to Krwa. One of them had just col
lected milk and put it in a milk pan on the oven to boil, but 'she did not
care whether the milk overboiled and spilled-she immediately left to go
see Kr  la. Some of them were breast feeding their small babies, and some
were engageq in distirbuting food to the members of their families, but
they left all such engagements and immediately rushed towards the spot
where Kr  la was playing His flute. Some were engaged in serving their
husbands, and some were themselves engaged in eating, but neither caring
to serve their husbands nor eat, they immediately left. Some of them
wanted to decorate their faces with cosmetic ointments and to dress
themselves very nicely before going to Kr  a, but unfortunately they could
not finish their cosmetic decorations nor put on their dresses in the right
way because of their anxiety to meet Kr !la immediately. Their faces were
decorated hurriedly and were haphazardly finished ; some even put the
lower part of their dresses on the upper part of their bodies and the upper
part on the lower part.
While all the gopis were hurriedly leaving their respective places, their
husbands, brothers and fathers were all struck with wonder to know where
they were going. Being young girls, they were protected either by husbands,
elderly brothers or fathers. All their guardians forbade them to go to
Kr pa, but they disregarded them. When a person becomes attracted by
192 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Kr l)a and is in full Kr l)a consciousness, he does not care for any worldly
duties, even though very urgent. Kr l)a consciousness is so powerful that
it gives everyone relief from all material activities. Srila Riipa Gosvami has
written a very nice verse wherein one gopi advises another, "'My dear
friend, if you desire to enjoy the company of material society, friendship
and love, then please do not go to see this smiling boy Govinda, who is
standing on the bank of the Yam una and playing His flute, His lips
brightened by the beams of the full moonlight." Srila Riipa Gosvami
indirectly instructs that one who has been captivated by the beautiful
smiling face of Kf l)a has lost all attraction for material enjoyments. This
is the test of advancement in Krwa consciousness: a person advancing-in
K[ l)a consciousness must lose interest in material activities and personal
sense gratification.
Some of the gopis were factually detained from going to Kf l)a by their
husbands and were locked up by force within their rooms. Being unable to
go to K[ l)a, they began to meditate upon His transcendental form by
closing their eyes. They already had the form of K[ l)a within their minds.
They proved to be the greatest yogis; as is stated in the Bhagavad-gitii, a
person who is constantly thinking of Krwa within his heart with faith and
love is considered to be the topmost of all yogis. Actually, a yogi concen
trates his mind on the form of Lord Vi l)U. That is real yoga. Kr IJa is the
original form of all Vi l)U tattvas. The gopis could not go to K[ l)a per
sonally, so they began to meditate on Him as perfect yogis.
In the conditioned stage of the living entities, there are two kinds of
results of fruitive activities: the conditioned living entity who is constantly
engaged in sinful activities has suffering as his result, and he who is engaged
in pious activities has material enjoyment as a result. In either case
material suffering or material enjoyment-the enjoyer or sufferer is condi
tioned by material nature.
The gopi associates of Kr l)a, who assemble in the place where Kr l!a is
appearing, are from different groups. Most of the gopis are eternal com
panions of K[ l)a. As stated in the Brahma-sarhhitii, iinanda-cin-maya-rasa
pratibhiivitiibhil;t: in the spiritual world the associates of Kf l)a, especially
the gopis, are the manifestation of the pleasure potency of Lord Kf l)a.
They are expansions of Srimati Radharal)i. But when Kr l!a exhibits His
transcendental pastimes within the material world in some of the universes,
not only the eternal associates of K[ l)a come, but also those who are
being promoted to that status from this material world. The gopis who
joined K[ l)a's pastimes within this material world were coming from the
status of ordinary human beings. If they had been bound by fruitive action,
The Rasa Dance: Introduction 193
they were fully freed from the reaction of karma by constant meditation
on Krwa. Their severe painful yearnings caused by their not being able to
see Kr  a freed them from all sinful reactions, and their ecstacy of tran
scendental love for Kr  a in His absence was transcendental to all their
reactions of material pious activities. The conditioned soul is subjected
to birth and death, either by pious or sinful activities, but the gopis
who began to meditate on Kr  a transcended both positions and became
purified and thus elevated to the status of the gopis already expanded by
His pleasure potency. All the go pis who concentrated their minds on
Kr  a in the spirit of paramour love became fully uncontaminated from
all the fruitive reactions of material nature, and some of them imme
diately gave up their material bodies developed under the three modes of
material nature.
Maharaja Parilqit heard Sukadeva Gosvami explain the situation of the
gopis who assembled with Kr t;J.a in the rasa dance. When he heard that
some of the gopis, simply by concentrating on Krwa as their paramour,
became freed from all contamination of material birth and death  he said,
"The gopis did not know that Kr  a is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. They accepted Him as a beautiful boy and considered Him to be
their paramour. So how was it possible for them to get freed from the
material condition just by thinking of a paramour?" One should consider
here that KB a and ordinary living beings are qualitatively one. The
ordinary living beings, being part and parcel of Kr  a, are also Brahman,
but Kr  a is the Supreme-Parabrahman. The question is, if it is possible
for the devotee to get free from the material, contaminated stage simply
by thinking of Kr  a, then why not others who are also thinking of
someone? If one is thinking of a husband or son, or if anyone at all is
thinking of another living entity, since all living entities are also Brahman,
then why are they not all freed from the contaminated stage of ma
terial nature? This is a very intelligent question, because the atheists
are always imitating Kr t;J.a. In these days of Kaliyuga, there are many
rascals whp think themselves to be as great as Krwa and who cheat people
into belie !ng that thinking of them is as good as thinking of Lord Kr  a.
Parik it Maharaja, apprehending the dangerous condition of blind followers
of demonic imitators, therefore asked this question, and fortunately it is
recorded in the Snmad-Bhagavatam to warn innocent people that thinking
of an ordinary man and thinking of Kr  a are not the same.
Actually, even thinking of the demigods cannot compare with thinking
of Kr  a. It is also warned in Vaiwava Tantra that one who puts Vi !m,
Narayat;J.a, or Krwa on the same level of the demigods is called pasaruJa, or
194 Kr !la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
a rascal. On hearing this question of Maharaja Parik it, Sukadeva Gosvami
replied, "My dear King, your question is already answered, even before
this incident."
Because Parik it Maharaja wanted to clear up the situation, his spiritual
master answered him very intelligently, "Why are you again asking the
same subject matter which has already been explained to you ? Why are
you so forge ful?" A spir tual  as er_is al ays _in the sup erior position, s<:
he has the nght to chastise his disciple m this way. S ukadeva Gosvami
knew that Maharaja Parik?it asked the question not for his own under
standing, but as a warning to the future innocent people who might think
others to be equal to Kr  a.
Sukadeva Gosvami then reminded Parik it Maharaja about the salvation
of Sisupala. Sisupala was always envious of Kr  a, and because of his envy
Kr pa killed him. Since Kr pa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Sisupala gained salvation simply by seeing Him. If an en v ious person can
get salvation simply by concentrating his mind on Kr  a, then what to
speak of the gopis who are so dear to Kr pa and always thinking of Him in
love? There must be some difference between the enemies and the friends.
If Kr  a's enemies could get freed from material contamination and
become one with the Supreme, then certainly His dear friends like the
gopis are freed and with Him.
Besides that , in the Bhagavad-gzta Kr pa is called Hr ikesa. Sukadeva
Gosvami also said that Kr tta is Hr ikesa, the Supersoul, whereas an
ordinary man is a conditioned soul covered by the material body. Kr pa
and Kr  a's body are the same because H e is Hr ikesa. Any person making
a distinction between Kr pa and Kr pa's body is fool number one. Kr pa
is Hr ike5a and Adhok aja. These two particular words have been used by
Parik it Maharaja in this instance. Hr ikesa is the Supersoul, and Adhok aja
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, transcendental to the material
nature. Just to show favor to the ordinary li v ing entities, out of His
causeless mercy, He appears as He is. Unfortunately, foolish persons
mistake Him to be another ordinary person, and so they become eligible
to go to hell. Sukadeva Gosvami reconfirmed that Kr pa is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, imperishable, immeasurable, and free from all
material contamination.
Sukadeva Gosvami continued to inform Maharaja Parik it that Kr pa is
not an ordinary person. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, full of
all spiritual qualities. He appears in this material world out of His causeless
. mercy, and whenever H e appears, He appears as He is without change. This
is also confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita. There the Lord say s . that He
The Rasa Dance : Introduction 195
appears in His spiritual potency . He does not appear under the control of
this material potency . The material potency is under His control. In the
Bhagavad-gitii it is stated that the material potency is working under His
su perintendence. It is also confirmed in the Brah ma-samhitii that the
material potency known as D urga is acting j ust as a shadow which moves
with the movement of the substance. The conclusion is that if one
somehow or other becomes attached to Kr pa or attracted to Him , either
because of His beauty, quality, opulence, fame, strength, renunciation or
knowledge, or even through lust, anger or fear, or affection or friendship,
then one's salvation and freedom from material contamination is assured.
In the Bhagavad-gitii, Eighteenth Chapter, the Lord also states that one
who is engaged in preaching Kr  la consciousness is very dear to Him. A
preacher has to face many difficulties in his struggle to preach pure Kr pa
consciousness. Sometimes he has to suffer bodily injuries, and sometimes
he has to meet death also . All this is taken as a great austerity on behalf of
Krwa . Kr pa therefore has said that such a preacher is very, very dear to
Him. If Krwa's enemies can expect salvation simply by concentrating
their minds on Him , then what to speak of persons who are so dear to
Krwa? The conclusion should be that the salvation of those who are
engaged in preaching Kr pa consciousness in the world is guaranteed in all
circumstances. But such preachers never care for salvation, because fac
tually one who is engaged in Kr pa consciousness, devotional service,
has already achieved salvation. Sukadeva Gosvami therefore assured King
Parik it that he should always rest assured that one attracted by Kr  1a
attains liberation from material bondage because Kr pa is the transcen
dental master of all mystic power .
When all the gopis assembled, as described, before Kr pa, H e began to
speak to them, welcoming them as well as discouraging them by word
jugglery. Kr pa is the supreme speaker ; H e is the speaker of the Bhagavad
gitii. He can speak on the highest elevated subj ects of philosophy, politics,
economics-everything. And He also spoke before the gopis who were so
dear to Him . He wanted to enchant them by word jugglery, and thus He
began to speak as follows.
" 0 ladies of Vrndavana," Kr pa said. " You are very fortunate, and
you are very dear to Me. I am very pleased that you have come here,
and I hope everything is well in V rndavana. N ow please order Me.
What can I do for you? What is the purpose of coming here in this
dead of night. Kindly take your seats and let Me know what I can do
for you . "
The gopis had come t o Kr  1a t o enj  y His company, t o dance with Him ,
196 Kr J}a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
embrace Him and kiss Him, and when Kr  a began to receive them very
officially, showing all kinds of etiquette, they were surprised. He was
treating them as ordinary society women. Therefore they began to smile
among themselves, ond they very eagerly listened to Kr  a talk in that way.
When He saw that they were smiling at Him, He said, "My dear friends,
you must know now that it is the dead of night, and the forest is very
dangerous. At this time all the ferocious jungle animals, the tigers, bears,
jackals and wolves, are prowling in the forest. Therefore it is very dangerous
for you. You cannot select a secure place now. Everywhere you go you
will find that all these animals are loitering to find their prey. I think,
therefore, that you are taking a great risk in coming here in the dead of
night. Please turn back immediately, without delay."
When He saw that they continued to smile, He said, "I very much
appreciate your bodily features. All of you have nice, very thin waists."
All of the gopis there were exquisitely beautiful. They are described by
the word sumadhyamii; the standard of beauty of a woman is said to be
sumadhyamii when the middle portion of the body is slender.
Kr !la wanted to impress on them that they were not old enough to take
care of themselves. Actually, they required protection. It was not very
wise for them to come in the dead of night to Kr  a. Kr  a also indicated
that He was young and that they were young girls. "It does not look very
well for young girls and boys to remain together in the dead of night."
After hearing this advice, the gopis did not seem very happy; therefore
Kr !la began to stress the point in a different way.
"My dear friends, I can understand that you have left your homes
without the permission of your guardians ; therefore I think your mothers,
your fathers, your elderly brothers or even your sons, and what to speak
of your husbands, must be very anxious to find you. As long as you are
here, they must be searching in different places, and their minds must be
very agitated. So don't tarry. Please go back and make them peaceful."
When the gopis appeared to be a little bit disturbed and angry from the
free advice of Kr  a, they diverted their attention to looking at the beauty
of the forest. At that time the whole forest was illuminated by the bright
shining of the moon, and the air was blowing very silently over the
blooming flowers, and the green leaves of the trees were moving in the
breeze. Kr  a took the opportunity of their looking at the forest to advise
them. "I think you have come out to see the beautiful V rndavana forest
on this night," He said, "but you must now be satisfied. So return to your
homes without delay. I understand that you are all very chaste women, so
now that you have seen the beautiful atmosphere of the Vrndavana forests,
The Rasa Dance: Introduction 197
please return home and engage in the faithful service of your respective
husbands. Some of you must have babies by this time, although you are
very young. You must have left your small babies at home, and they
must be crying. Please immediately go back home and just feed them with
your breast milk. I can also understand that you have very great affection
for Me, and out of that transcendental affection you have come here,
hearing My playing on the flute. Your feelings of love and affection for Me
are very appropriate because I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
All living creatures are My parts and parcels, and naturally they are
affectionate to Me. So this affection for Me is very much welcome, and I
congratulate you for this. Now you can go back to your homes. Another
thing I must explain to you is that for a chaste woman, service to the
husband without duplicity is the best religious principle. A woman should
be not only faithful and chaste to the husband, but affectionate to the
friends of her husband, obedient to the father and mother of the husband,
and affectionate to the younger brothers of the husband. And most
importantly, the woman must take care of the children."
In this way, Kr t:la explained the duty of a woman. He also stressed the
point of serving the husband: "Even if he is not of very good character, or
even if he is not very rich or fortunate, or even if he is old or invalid on
account of continued diseases, whatever her husband's condition, a woman
should not divorce her husband if she actually desires to be elevated to the
higher planetary systems after leaving this body. Besides that, it is con
sidered abominable in society if a woman is unfaithful and goes searching
for another man. Such habits will deter a woman from being elevated to
the heavenly planets, and the results of such habits are very degrading. A
married woman should not search for a paramour, for this is not sanctioned
by the Vedic principles of life. If you think that you are very much
attached to Me and you want My association, I advise you not to personally
try to enjoy Me. It is better for you to go home, simply talk about Me,
think of Me, and by this process of constantly remembering Me and
chanting My names, you will surely be elevated to the spiritual platform.
There is no need to stand near Me. Please go back home."
The instruction given herein by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to
the gopis was not at all sarcastic. Such instructions should be taken very
seriously by all honest women. The chastity of women is specifically
stressed herein by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore this
principle should be followed by any serious woman who wants to be
elevated to a higher status of life. Kr  a is the center of all affection for all
living creatures. When this affection is developed for Kr t:la, then one
198 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
surpasses and transcends all Vedic injunctions. This was possible for the
gopis because they saw Kr lJa face to face. This is not possible for any
women in the conditioned state. Unfortunately, by imitating the behavior
of Kr JJa with the gopis, sometimes a rascal takes the position of Kr JJa,
following the philosophy of monism or oneness, and he very irresponsibly
takes advantage of this rasa-lilii to entice many innocent women and
mislead them in the name of spiritual realization. As a warning, Lord Kr JJa
has herein hinted that what was possible for the gopis is not possible for
ordinary women. Although a woman can actually be elevated by advanced
Kr lJa consciousness, she should not be enticed by an imposter who says
that he is Kr JJa. She should concentrate her devotional activities in
chanting and meditating upon Kr lJa, as is advised herein. One should not
follow the men called sahajiya, the so-called devotees who take everything
very lightly.
When Kr JJa spoke in such a discouraging way to the gopis, they became
very sad, for they thought that their desire to enjoy riisa dance with Kr JJa
would be frustrated. Thus they became full of anxiety. Out of great
sadness, the gopis began to breathe very heavily. Instead of looking at
Kr JJa face to face, they bowed their heads and looked to the ground, and
they began to draw various types of curved lines on the ground with their
toes. They were shedding heavy tears, and their cosmetic decorations were
being washed from their faces. The water from their eyes mixed with the
kunkuma of their breasts and fell to the ground. They could not say
anything to Kr JJa, but simply stood there silently. By their silence they
expressed that their hearts were grieviously wounded.
The gopis were not ordinary women. In essence they were on an equal
level with Kr JJa. They are His eternal associates. As it is confirmed in the
Brahma-samhita, they are expansions of the pleasure potency of Kr JJa,
and as His potency they are nondifferent from Him. Although they were
depressed by the words of Kr JJa, they did not like to use harsh words
against Him. Yet they wanted to rebuke Kr JJa for His unkind words, and
therefore they began to speak in faltering voices. They did not like to use
harsh words against Kr lJa because He was their dearmost, their heart and
soul. The gopis had only Kr lJa within their hearts. They were completely
surrendered and dedicated souls. N aturally, when they heard such unkind
words, they tried to reply, but in the attempt torrents of tears fell from
their eyes. Finally they managed to speak.
"Kr JJa," they said, "You are very cruel! You should not talk like that.
We are full-fledged surrendered souls. Please accept us, and don't talk in
that cruel way. Of course, Y ou are the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
The Rasa Dance: Introduction 199
and Y ou can do whatever You like, but it is not worthy of Your position
to treat us in such a cruel way. We have come to Y ou, leaving everything
behind, just to take shelter of Your lotus feet. We know that You are
completely independent and can do whatever You like, but we request
Y ou, don't reject us. We are Your devotees. You should accept us as Lord
Naraya a accepts His devotees. There are many devotees of Lord Nara
ya a who worship Him for salvation, and He awards them salvation.
Similarly, how can You reject us when we have no other shelter than Your
lotus feet?
"0 dear Kr  a," they continued, "You are the supreme instructor.
There is no doubt about it. Your instructions to the women to be faithful
to their husbands and to be merciful to their children, to take care of
homely affairs and to be obedient to the elderly members of the family,
are surely just according to the tenets of siistras. But we know also that all
these instructions of the siistras may be observed perfectly by keeping
oneself under the protection of Y our lotus feet. Our husbands, friends,
family members and children are all dear and pleasing to us only because
of Your presence, for You are the Supersoul of all living creatures. Without
Your presence, one is worthless. When Y ou leave the body, the body
immediate! y dies, and according to the injunction of the siistra, a dead
body must immediately be thrown in a river or burned. Therefore, ulti
mately You are the dearmost personality in this world. By placing our
faith and love in Your personality, there is no chance of our being bereft
of husband, friends, sons or daughters. If a woman accepts You as the
supreme husband, then she will never be bereft of her husband, as in the
bodily concept of life. If we accept You as our ultimate husband, then
there is no question of being separated, divorced or widowed. You are the
eternal husband, eternal son, eternal friend, and eternal master, and one
who enters into a relationship with You is eternally happy. Since You are
the teacher of all religious principles, Y our lotus feet first have to be
worshiped. Accordingly, the siistras state, iiciirya-upiisana: the worship of
Y our lotus feet is the first principle. Besides that, as stated in the Bhagavad
gita, You are the only enjoyer, You are the only proprietor, and You are
the only friend. As such, we have come to You, leaving aside all so-called
friends, society and love, and now You have become our enjoyer. Let us
be everlastingly enjoyed by You. Be our proprietor, for that is Your
natural claim, and be our supreme friend, for You are naturally so. Let us
thus embrace You as the supreme beloved."
Then the gopis told the lotus-eyed Kr  a, "Please do not discourage
our long-cherished desires to have You as our husband. Any intelligent man

Kf l}a appeared on the scene and tou ched the serpent with His lotus feet. (p. 226)

Mohana Madhuri. ( p . 2 :1 5 )

It appeared that Kr pa was a greenish sapphire locket in the midst of a golden necklace .
(p. 2 1 4)
Being kicked by Kr !la , AriHasura rolled over and began to m ove his legs violently .
(p. 23 7)
The hand of Kr  a felt to Kesi like a hot iron rod . ( p . 240)
Akrura became overwhelmed with all the symptoms of ecstasy ; he wept , and his
body trembled. (p. 248 )
The Rasa Dance: Introduction 201
Vaikut;Itha planets. She underwent great austerity and penance to have
some shelter at Your lotus feet, which are always covered by tulasi leaves.
Your lotus feet are the proper shelter of Your servitors, and the goddess
of fortune, instead of abiding on Your chest, comes down and worships
Your lotus feet. We have now placed ourselves under the dust of Your feet.
Please do not reject us, for we are fully surrendered souls.
"Dear Kr t;Ia, You are known as Hari. You destroy all the miseries of all
living entities, specifically of those who have left their homes and family
attachment and have completely taken to You. We have left our homes
with the hope that we shall completely devote and dedicate our lives to
Your service . We are simply begging to be engaged as Your servants. We do
not wish to ask You to accept us as Your wives. Simply accept us as Your
maidservants. Since You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead and like
to enjoy the parakiya-rasa and are famous as a transcendental woman
hunter, we have come to satisfy Your transcendental desires. We are also
after our own satisfaction, for simply by looking at Your smiling face we
have become very lusty. We have come before You decorated with all
ornaments and dress, but until You embrace us, all our dresses and beauti
ful features remain incomplete. You are the Supreme Person, and if You
complete our dressing attempt as the puru§a-bhii§ar.a, or the male orna
ment, then all our desires and bodily decorations are complete.
"Dear Kr t;Ia, we have simply been captivated by seeing You with tilaka
and with earrings and by seeing Your beautiful face covered with scattered
hair and Your extraordinary smile. Not only that, but we are also attracted
by Your arms, which always give assurance to the sunendered souls. And
although we are also attracted by Your chest, which is always embraced
by the goddess of fortune, we do not wish to take her position. We shall
simply be satisfied by being Your maidservants. If You, however, accuse
us of encouraging prostitution, then we can only ask where is that woman
within these three worlds who is not captivated by Your beauty and the
rhythmic songs vibrated by Your transcendental flute? Within these three
worlds there is no distinction between men and women in relation to You
because both men and women belong to the marginal potency or prakrti.
N o one is actually the enjoyer or the male ; everyone is meant to be
enjoyed by You. There is no woman within these three worlds who
cannot but deviate from her path of chastity once she is attracted to You
because Y our beauty is so sublime that not only men and women, but
cows, Rirds, beasts and even trees, fruits and flowers-everyone and every
thing-become enchanted, and what to speak of ourselves? It is, however,
definitely decided that as Lord Vi t;IU is always protecting the demigods
202 Kr !la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
from the onslaught of demons, so you have also advented in v rndavana
just to give the residents protection from all kinds of distress. 0 dear
friend of the distressed, kindly place Your hand on our burning breasts as
well as on our heads, because we have surrendered unto Y ou as Your
eternal maidservants. If You think, however, that Your lotus-like palms
might he burned to ashes if placed on our burning breasts, let us assure
You that Your palms will feel pleasure instead of pain, as the lotus flower,
although very delicate and soft, enjoys the scorching heat of the sun."
Upon hearing the anxious plea of the gopis, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead began to smile, and being very kind to the gopis, the Lord, al
though self-sufficient, began to embrace them and kiss them as they desired.
When Kr  a, smiling, looked at the faces of the gopis, the beauty of their
faces became a hundred times enhanced. When He was enjoying them in
their midst, He appeared just like the full moon surrounded by millions of
shining stars. Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead, surrounded by
hundreds of gopis and decorated with a flower garland of many colors, be
gan to wander within the V rndavana forest, sometimes singing to Himself
and sometimes singing with the gopis. In this way, both the Lord and the
gopis reached the cool sandy hank of the Yamuna where there were lilies
and lotus flowers. In such a transcendental atmosphere, both the gopis
and Kr tta began to enjoy one another. While they were walking on the
hank of the Y am una, Kr tJ.a would sometimes put His arms around a gopi's
head, breast or waist. Pinching one another and joking and looking at one
another, they enjoyed. When Kr tla touched the bodies of the gopis, their
lust to embrace Him increased. They all enjoyed these pastimes. Thus the
gopis were blessed with all mercy by the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
for they enjoyed His company without a tinge of mundane sex life.
The gopis, however, soon began to feel very proud, thinking themselves
to he the most fortunate women in the universe by being favored by the
company of Kr tla. Lord Kr tla, who is known as Kesava, could imme
diately understand their pride caused by their great fortune of enjoying
Him personally, and in order to show them His causeless mercy and to
curb their false pride, He immediately disappeared from the scene, ex
hibiting His opulence of renunciation. The Supreme Personality of God
head is always full with six kinds of opulences, and this is an instance of
the opulence of renunciation. This renunciation confirms Kr  ta's total non
attachment. He is always self-sufficient and is not dependent on anything.
This is the platform on which the transcendental pastimes are enacted.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Twenty-ninth Chapter of
Krsna, "The Rasa Dance: Introduction. ". . .
30 I Kr  a 's Hiding from the Gopis
When Kr !la suddenly disappeared from the company of the gopis, they
began to search for Him in every place . After not finding Him anywhere ,
they became afraid and almost mad after Him. They were simply thinking
of the pastimes of Krwa in great love and affection. Being absorbed in
thought, they experienced loss of memory, and with dampened eyes they
began to see the very pastimes of Kr !la, His beautiful talks with them, His
embracing, kissing, and other activities. Being so attracted to Kr !la, they
began to imitate His dancing, His walking and smiling, as if they them
selves were Kr !la. D ue to Kr !la 's absence, they all became crazy ; each
one of them began to tell the others that she was Kr !la Himself. Soon
they all began to assemble together and chant Kr !la 's name very loudly,
and they moved from one part of the forest to another searching for Him.
Actually, Kr !la is all-pervasive ; He is in the sky, and He is in the forest ;
He is within the heart , and He is always everywhere .
The gopis therefore began to question the trees and plants about Kr !la.
There were various types of big trees and small plants in the forest , and
the gopis began to address them. "D ear banyan tree, have you seen the son
of M aharaj a N anda passing this way, laughing and playing on His flute? He
has stolen our hearts and has gone away. If you have seen Him, kindly
inform us which way He has gone. Dear asolw tree, dear niiga flower tree
and campaka flower tree , have you seen the younger brother of Balarama
pass this way? He has disappeared because of our pride . " The gopis were
aware of the reason for Kr !la 's sudden disappearance . They could under
stand that when they were enj oying Kr !la, they thought themselves to be
the most fortunate women within the universe , and since they were feeling
proud, Krwa disappeared immediately just to curb their pride. Kr !la does
not like His devotees to be proud of their service to Him. He accepts
everyone's service , but He does not like one devotee to be prouder than
203
204 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
others. If sometimes there are such feelings, Kr  a ends them by changing
His attitude toward the devotee.
The gopis then began to address the tulasi plants: "Dear tulasi, you are
much beloved by Lord Kr  a because your leaves are always at His lotus
feet. Dear miilati flower, dear mallikii flower, dear jasmine flower, all of
you must have been touched by Kr  a while He was passing this way after
giving us transcendental enjoyment. Have you seen Madhava passing this
way? 0 mango trees, 0 trees of jack fruit, 0 pear trees and asana trees!
0 blackberries and bael trees and trees of kadamba flower-you are all very
pious trees to be living on the bank of Yamuna. Kr  a must have passed
through this way. Will you kindly let us know which way He has gone?
The gopis then looked upon the ground they were traversing and began
to address the earth, "Dear earthly planet, we do not know how many
penances and austerities you have undergone to be now living with the
footprints of Lord Kr  a upon you. You are very jolly; the hairs on your
body are these jubilant trees and plants. Lord Kr  la must have been very
much pleased with you, otherwise how could He have embraced you in
the form of V araha the boar? When you were submerged in water, He
delivered you, taking the whole weight of your existence on His tusks."
After addressing the innumerable trees and plants, they turned their
faces toward the beautiful deer who were looking on them very pleasingly.
"It appears," they addressed the deer, "that Kr  a, who is the Supreme
Naraya a Himself, must have passed through this way along with His com
panion, Lak mi, the goddess of fortune. Otherwise, how is it possible that
the aroma of His garland, which is smeared with the red kunkuma from
the breast of the goddess of fortune, can be perceived in the breeze
blowing here? It appears that they must have passed through here and
touched your bodies, and thus you are feeling so pleasant and are looking
toward us with sympathy. Will you kindly, therefore, inform us which
way Kr  a has gone? Kr  a is the well-wisher of Vrndavana. He is as kind
to you as to us ; therefore after leaving us, He must have been present in
your company. 0 fortunate trees, we are thinking of Kr  a, the younger
brother of Balarama. While passing through here, with one hand resting on
the shoulder of the goddess of fortune and the other hand whirling a lotus
flower, He must have been very pleased to accept your obeisances, and He
must have glanced at you with great pleasure.
Some of the gopis then began to address their other gopi friends,
"Dear friends, why don't you question these creepers who are so ju
bilantly embracing the big trees as if the trees were their husbands?
It appears that the flowers of the creepers must have been touched
KH!ia 's Hiding from the Gopis 205
by the nails of Kr rta. Otherwise, how could they feel so jubilant?"
After searching for Kr rta here and there, when the gopis became
fatigued, they began to talk like madwomen. They could only satisfy
themselves by imitating the different pastimes of Kr  1a. One of them
imitated the demon, Putana, and one of them imitated Krwa and sucked
her breast. One gopi imitated a hand-driven cart, and another gopi lay
down beneath the cart and began to throw up her legs, touching the wheels
of the cart, as Kr va did to kill the demon Sakatasura. They imitated child
Kr rta, lying down on the ground, and one gopi became the demon
Trrtavarta and carried the small child Krwa by force into the sky ; and one
of the gopis began to imitate Kr  la while He was attempting to walk,
ringing His ankle bells. Two gopis imitated Kr  ta and Balarama, and many
others imitated Their cowherd boy friends. One gopi assumed the form of
Bakasura, and another forced her to fall down as the demon Bakasura did
when he was killed ; similarly, another gopi defeated Vatsasura. Just as
Kr  ta used to call His cows by their different names, so the gopis imitated
Him, calling the cows b y their respective names. One of the gopis began to
play on a flute, and another praised her the way Kr  a's boy friends
praised Him while He played on His flute. One of the gopis took another
gopi on her shoulders, just as Kr  la used to take His boy friends. Ab
sorbed in thoughts of Krwa, the gopi who was carrying her friend began
to boast that she was Kr  a herself: "All of you just see my movement!"
One of the gopis raised her hand with her covering garments and said,
"Now don't be afraid of torrents of rain and severe hurricanes. I'll save
you ! " In this way she imitated the lifting of Govardhana Hill. One gopi
forcibly put her feet on the head of another gopi and said, "You rascal
Kaliya! I shall punish you severely. You must leave this place. I have
descended on this earth to punish all kinds of miscreants!" Another gopi
told her friends, "Just see! The flames of the forest fire are coming to
devour us. Please close your eyes, and I shall immediately save you from
this imminent danger."
In this way all the gopis were madly feeling the absence of Kr  1a. They
enquired for Him from the trees and plants. In some places they found
the imprints of the marks on the sole of His feet-namely the flag, the
lotus flower, the trident, the thunderbolt, etc. After seeing those foot
prints, they exclaimed, "0 here is the impression of the marks on the sole
of Kr  a. All the marks, such as the flag, the lotus flower, the trident and
the thunderbolt, are distinctly visible here." They began to follow the
footprints, and shortly they saw another set of footprints beside them,
and immediately they became very sorry. "Dear friends, just see! Whose
206 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
are these other footprints? They are beside the footprints of the son of
Maharaja N anda. It is certainly Krwa passing through, resting His hand on
some other gopi, exactly as an elephant goes side by side with his beloved
mate. We must, therefore, understand that this particular gopi served
Krwa with greater affectionate love than ourselves. Because of this,
although He has left us, He could not leave Her company. He has taken
Her along with Him. Dear friends, just imagine how the dust of this place
is transcendentally glorious. The dust of the lotus feet of Krwa is wor
shiped even by Lord Brahma and Lord Siva, and the goddess of fortune,
Lak mi. But at the same time, we are very sorry that this particular gopi
has gone along with Kf l).a, for She is sharing the nectar of Kn!!a's kisses
and leaving us aside to lament. 0 friends, just see! At this particular spot
we do not see the footprints of that gopi. It appears that because there
were some pin-pricks from the dried grass, Krwa took RadharaFi on His
shoulder. 0, She is so dear to Him! Knrm must have picked some flowers
in this spot to satisfy Radharal).i, because here, where He stood erect to
get the flowers from the high branches of the tree, we find only half the
impression of His feet. Dear friends, just see how Kn!la must have sat
down here with Radharal).i and tried to set flowers in Her hair. You can be
certain that both of Them sat together here. Kr !la is self-sufficient ; He
has nothing to enjoy from any other source, yet just to satisfy His devotee
He has treated Radharal).i exactly as a lusty boy treats his girl friend. Kr !la
is so kind that He always tolerates the disturbances created by His girl
friends."
In this way, all the gopis began to point out the faults of the particular
gopi who had been taken alone by Knl).a. They began to say that the chief
gopi, Radharal).i, who was taken alone by Krwa, must be very proud of
Her position, thinking Herself the greatest of the gopis. "Yet how could
Kr !la take Her away alone, leaving all of us aside, unless She be extra
ordinarily qualified and beautiful? She must have taken Krwa in the deep
forest and told Him, 'My dear Kf l).a, I am now very tired. I cannot go any
further. Please carry Me wherever You like.' When Krwa was spoken to in
this way, He might have told Radharal).i, 'All right, better get on My
shoulder.' But immediately Kr !la must have disappeared, and now Radha
ral).i must be lamenting for Him, 'My dear lover, My dearest, You are so
fine and so powerful. Where have Y ou gone? I am nothing but Your most
obedient maidservant. I am very much aggrieved. Please come and be with
Me again.' Krwa, however, is not coming to Her. He must be watching
Her from a distant place and enjoying Her sorrow."
All the gopis then went further and further into the forest, searching
Kr !la's Hiding from the Gopis 207
out Kr !la, but when they learned that actually Radhara!li was left alone
by Kr !la, they became very sorry. This is the test of Kr !la consciousness.
In the beginning they were a little envious that Kr !la had taken Radha
ra!ll alone, leaving aside all other gopis, but as soon as they knew that
Kr !la had also left Radharavi and that She was alone lamenting for Him,
they became more sympathetic to Her. The gopis found Radhara!li and
heard everything from Her, about how She misbehaved with Kr !la and
how She was proud and was insulted for Her pride. After hearing all this,
they became actually very sympathetic. Then all the gopis, including
Radhara!1i, began to proceed further into the forest until they could no
longer see the moonlight.
When they saw that it was getting gradually darker, they stopped. Their
mind and intelligence became absorbed in the thoughts of Kr !la; they all
imitated the activities of Kr !la and His speeches. Due to their heart and
soul being completely given to Kr !la, they began to chant His glories,
completely forgetting their family interests. In this way, all the gopis
assembled together on the bank of Yam una, and expecting that Kr  a
must return to them , they simply engaged in the chanting of the glories of
Sri Kr va-Hare Kr !la, Hare Krwa, Kr !la Kr I;Ia, Hare Hare, Hare Rama,
Hare Rama, Rama Rama, Hare Hare.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirtie th Chapter of Kr !la,
"Knrw's Hiding from the Gopis. "
3 1 I S ongs by the Gopis
One gopi said, "My· dear Kr§ a, ever since Y ou took Y our birth in this
land of V raj abhiimi , everything appears to be glorious. The land of
v rndavana has become glorious, and it is as if the goddess of fortune is
personally always existing here. But it is only we who are very unhappy,
because we are searching for You, but cannot see Y ou with our greatest
effort. Our life is completely dependent upon You ; therefore we request
that Y ou again come to us. "
Another go pi said, "My dear Kf§ a, Y ou are the life and soul even of
the lotus flower that grows on the water of lakes made transparent by the
clear rains of autumn. Although the lotus flowers are so beautiful, without
Y our glance they fade away. Similarly, without You, we are also dying.
Actually, we are neither Y our wives nor slaves. You never spent any money
for us, yet we are simply attracted by Y our glance. N ow, if we die without
receiving Y our glance, Y ou 'll be responsible for our deaths. Certainly the
killing of women is a great sin, and if Y ou do not come to see us and we
die, Y ou will suffer the reactions of sin. So please come see us. Do not
think that one can be killed only by certain weapons. We are being killed
by Y our absence. Y ou should consider how Y ou are responsible for
killing women. We are always grateful to Y ou because Y ou have protected
us many times : from the poisonous water of Yamuna, from the serpent
Kaliya, from Bakasura, from the anger of Indra and his torrents of rain,
from forest fire and so many other incidents. You are the greatest and
most powerful of all. It is wonderful for Y ou to protect us from so many
dangers, but we are surprised that Y ou are neglecting us at this moment.
Dear Kr§ a, dear friend, we know very well that You are not actually the
son of mother Y asoda or the cowherd man N anda Maharaj a . Y ou are the
Supreme Personality of Godhead and the Supersoul of all living entities.
You have, out of Y our own causeless mercy, appeared in this world,
208
Songs by the Gopis 209
requested by Lord Brahma for the protection of the world. It is by Y our
kindness only that You have appeared in the dynasty of Y adu. 0 best in
the dynasty of Y adu, if anyone afraid of this materialistic way of life takes
shelter at Your lotus feet, You never deny him protection. Your move
ments are sweet, and You are independent, touching the goddess of
fortune with one hand and in the other bearing a lotus flower. That is
Your extraordinary feature. Please, therefore, come before us and bless
us with the lotus flower in Your hand.
"Dear Krwa, You are the killer of all the fears of the inhabitants of
V rndavana. You are the supremely powerful hero, and we know that You
can kill the unnecessary pride of Your devotee as well as the pride of
women like us simply by Your beautiful smile. We are simply Your maid
servants and slaves; please, therefore, accept us by showing us Your
lotus-like beautiful face.
"Dear Kr !la, actually we have become very lusty, having been touched
by Your lotus feet. Your lotus feet certainly kill all kinds of sinful
activities of devotees who have taken shelter there. You are so kind that
even the ordinary animals take shelter under Your lotus feet. Your lotus
feet are also the residence of the goddess of fortune, yet You dance on the
head of the Kaliya serpent with them. Now we are requesting You to
kindly place Your lotus feet on our breasts and pacify our lusty desires to
touch You.
"0 Lord, Your attractive eyes, like the lotus, are so nice and pleasing.
Your sweet words are so fascinating that they please even the greatest
scholars, who also become attracted to You. We are also attracted by
Your speaking and by the beauty of Your face and eyes. Please, therefore,
satisfy us by Your nectarean kisses. Dear Lord, words spoken by You or
words describing Your activities are full of nectar, and simply by speaking
or hearing Your words one can be saved from the blazing fire of material
existence. Great demigods like Lord Brahma and Lord Siva are always
engaged in chanting the glories of Your words. They do so to eradicate the
sinful activities of all living entities in the material world. If one simply
tries to hear Your transcendental words, he can very quickly be elevated
to the platform of pious activities. For the Vaiwavas, Your words give
transcendental pleasure, and saintly persons who are engaged in distributing
Your transcendental message all over the world are first-class charitable
persons." (This is confirmed by Riipa Gosvam'i also when he addressed
Lord Caitanya as the most munificent incarnation because Lord Caitanya
distributed the words of Krwa and love of Krwa free of charge all over
the world.)
210 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
"Dear Kr !la," the gopis continued, "You are very cunning. You can
imagine how much we are distressed simply by remembering Your cunning
smile, Your pleasing glance, Your walking with us in the forest of V rnda
vana, and Your auspicious meditations. Your talks with us in lonely places
were heart-warming. Now we are all aggrieved to remember Your behavior.
Please save us. Dear Kr  a, certainly You know how much we are saddened
when You go out of V rndavana village to tend the cows in the forest. How
we are afflicted simply to think that Your soft lotus feet are being pricked
by the dry grass and the tiny stones in the forest! We are so attached to
You that we always think simply of Your lotus feet.
"0 Krwa, when You return from the pasturing ground with the
animals, we see Your face covered by Your curly hair and dusted by the
hoof-dust of the cows. We see Your mildly smiling face, and our desire to
enjoy You increases. 0 dear Kr !la, You are the supreme lover, and You
always give shelter to surrendered souls. You fulfill everyone's desire;
Your lotus feet are even worshiped by Lord Brahma, the creator of the
universe. To whomever worships Your lotus feet, You without a doubt
always bestow Your benedictions. So kindly be pleased with us and keep
Your lotus feet on our breasts and thus relieve our present distresses. Dear
Krwa, we are seeking Your kisses which You offer even to Your flute. The
vibration of Your flute enchants the whole world and our hearts also.
Kindly, therefore, return and kiss us with Your mouth of nectar."
When Lord Krwa finally reappeared and assembled with the gopis, He
looked very beautiful, just befitting a person with all kinds of opulences. In
the Brahma-sarhhitii, it is stated, iinanda-cin-maya-rasa-pratibhiivitiibhi{t:
Krwa alone is not particularly beautiful, but when His energy-especially
His pleasure energy, represented by Radhara!l-1-expands, He looks very
magnificent. The Mayavada conception of the perfection of the Absolute
Truth without potency is due to insufficient knowledge. Actually, outside
the exhibition of His different potencies, the Absolute Truth is not
complete. Ananda-cin-maya-rasa means that His body is a transcendental
form of eternal bliss and knowledge. Kr !la is always surrounded by
different potencies, and therefore He is perfect and beautiful. We under
stand from Brahma-sarhhitii and Skanda Puriirw that Kr !la is always
surrounded by many thousands of goddesses of fortune. The gopis are all
goddesses of fortune, and Kr !la took them hand in hand on the bank of
the Yamuna.
It is said in the Skanda Purii[La that out of many thousands of gopis,
16,000 are predominant; out of those 16,000 gopis, 108 gopis are especially
prominent; and out of 1 0 8 gopis, eight gopis are still more prominent; out
Songs by the Gopis 21 1
of eight gopis, Radhara i and Candravali are prominent ; and out of these
two gopis, Radhara!li is the most prominent.
When Kr§ a entered the forest on the bank of the Yamuna, the moon
light dissipated the surrounding darkness. Due to the season, flowers like
the k unda and kadamba were blooming, and a gentle breeze was carrying
their aroma. Due to the aroma, the bees were also flying in the breeze,
thinking that the aroma was honey. The gopis made a seat for Krwa by
leveling the soft sand and placing cloths over it.
The gopis who were gathered there were mostly all followers of the
Vedas. In their previous births, during Lord Ramacandra's advent, they
were Vedic scholars who desired the association of Lord Ramacandra in
conjugal love. Ramacandra gave them the benediction that they would be
present for the advent of Lord Krwa, and He would fulfill their desires.
During Kr§ a's advent, the Vedic scholars took birth in the shape of the
gopis in Vrndavana ; as young gopis, they got the association of Kr§ a in
fulfillment of their previous births' desire. The ultimate goal of their
perfect desire was attained, and they were so joyous that they had nothing
further to desire. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gitii: if one attains the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, then he has no desire for anything. When
the . gopis had Kr§ a in their company, not only all their grief, but their
lamenting in the absence of Kf§ a was relieved. They felt they had no
desire to be fulfilled. Fully satisfied in the company of Kf§!la, they spread
their cloths on the ground. These garments were made of fine linen and
smeared with the red kunkuma which decorated their breasts. With great
care they spread a sitting place for Kr§ a. Kf§ a was their life and soul,
and they created a very comfortable seat for Him.
Sitting on the seat amongst the gopis, Kr !la became more beautiful.
Great yogis like Lord Siva, Lord Brahma or even Lord Se§a and others
always try to fix their attention upon Kf§!la in their heart, but here the
gopis actually saw Kr§ a seated before them on their cloths. In the society
of the gopis, Krwa looked very beautiful. They were the most beautiful
damsels within the three worlds, and they assembled together around
Kr§ a.
It may be asked herein how Kr§ a seated Himself beside so many gopis
and yet sat alone. There is a significant word in this verse: isvara. As it is
stated in the Bhagavad-gitii, isvara[t sarva-bhiitiiniim. Isvara refers to the
Supreme Lord as the Supersoul seated in everyone's heart. Kf§ a also
manifested this potency of expansion as Paramatma in this gathering with
the gopis. Kr§ a was sitting by the side of each gopi, unseen by the others.
Kr§ a was so kind to the gopis that instead of sitting in their hearts to be
212 Kr  a  the Supreme Personality of Godhead
appreciated in yogic meditation, He seated Himself by their sides. By
seating Himself outside, He showed special favor to the gopis, who were
the selected beauties of all creation. Having gotten their most beloved
Lord, the gopis began to please Him by moving their eyebrows and smiling
and also by suppressing their anger. Some of them took His lotus feet in
their laps and began to massage Him. And while smiling, they confidential
ly expressed their suppressed anger and said, "Dear Kr IJa, we are
ordinary women of V rndavana, and we do not know much about V edic
knowledge what is right and what is wrong. We therefore put a question
to You, and, since You are very learned, You can answer it properly. In
dealing between lovers, we find that there are three classes of men. One
class simply receives, another class reciprocates favorably, even if the lover
is very contrary, and the third class neither acts contrary nor answers
favorably in dealings of love. So out of these three classes, which do You
prefer, or which do You call honest?"
In answer, Kr IJa said, "My dear friends, persons who simply reciprocate
the loving dealings of the other party are just like merchants. They give in
loving affairs as much as they get from the other party. Practically there
is no question of love. It is simply business dealing, and it is self-interested
or self-centered. Better the second class of men, who love in spite of the
opposite party's contrariness; even those without a tinge of loving affairs
are better than the merchants. Sincere love can be seen when the father
and mother love their children in spite of their children's neglect. The
third class neither reciprocates nor neglects. They can be further divided
into two classes. One is the self-satisfied, who do not require anyone's love.
They are called iitmiiriima, which means they are absorbed in the thought
of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and so do not care whether one
loves them or not. But another class are ungrateful men. They are called
callous. The men in this group revolt against superior persons. For instance,
a son, in spite of receiving all kinds of things from loving parents, may be
callous and not reciprocate. Those in this class are generally known as
gurudruha, which nieans they receive favors from the parents or the
spiritual master and yet neglect them."
Kr IJa indirectly answered the questions of the gopis, even those ques
tions which implied that KniJa did not properly receive their dealings. In
answer, Kr pa said that He, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
self-satisfied. He does not require aryone's love, but at the same time He
said that He is not ungrateful.
"My dear friends," Kr IJa continued, "you might be aggrieved by My
words and acts, but you must know that sometimes I do not reciprocate
Songs by the Gopis 2 1 3
m y devotees' dealings with M e . I t appears that m y devotees are very much
attached to Me, but sometimes I do not reciprocate their feelings properly
in order to increase their love for Me more and more. If I can very easily
be approached by them, they might think, 'Kr pa is so easily available.' So
sometimes I do not respond. If a person has no money but after some time
accumulates some wealth and then loses it, he will think of the lost
property twenty-four hours a day. Similarly, in order to increase the love
of My devotees, sometimes I appear to be lost to them, and instead of
forgetting Me, they feel their loving sentiments for Me increase. My dear
friends, do not think for a moment that I have been dealing with You just
like ordinary devotees. I know what you are. Y ou have forsaken all kinds
of social and religious obligations; you have given up all connection with
your parents. Without caring for social convention and religious obligations,
you have come to Me and loved Me, and I am so much obliged to you that
I cannot treat you as ordinary devotees. D o not think that I was away
from you. I was near to you. I was simply seeing how much you were
anxious for Me in My absence. So please do not try to find fault in Me.
Because you consider Me so dear to you, kindly excuse Me if I have done
anything wrong. I cannot repay your continual love for Me, even through
out the lifetimes of the demigods in the heavenly planets. It is impossible
to repay you or show gratitude for your love; therefore please b e satisfied
by your own pious activities. You have displayed exemplary attraction
for Me, overcoming the greatest difficulties arising from family connec
tions. Please be satisfied with your highly exemplary character, for it is not
possible for Me to repay your debt. "
The exemplary character o f devotional service manifested b y the devo
tees of v rndavana is the purest type of devotion. It is enjoined in
authoritative sastra that devotional service must be ahaituka and aprati
hata. This means that devotional service to Kr pa cannot be checked by
political or religious convention. The stage of devotional service is always
transcendental. The gopis particularly showed pure devotional service
towards Kr pa, so much so that Kr pa Himself remained indebted to them.
Lord Caitanya thus said that the devotional service manifested by the
gopis in V rndavana excelled all other methods of approaching the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-first Chapter of
Kr pa, "Songs by the Gopis. "
32 I Description of the Rasa D ance
Thus hearing the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kr§9-a, speaking to
pacify them, the gopis became very much pleased. And not only by
hearing His words, but also by touching the hands and legs of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, they became completely relieved from the great
suffering of separation. After this, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
began His riisa dance. When one dances in the midst of many girls, it is
called a riisa dance. So Kf§9-a began to dance among the most beautiful
and fortunate girls within the three WDrlds. The gopis of v rndavana, who
were so attracted to Him, danced with Krwa, hand in hand.
Kf§9-a's rasa dance should never be compared with any kind of material
dance, such as a ball dance or a society dance. The riisa dance is a
completely spiritual performance. In order to establish this fact, Kf§9-a,
the supreme mystic, expanded Himself in many forms and stood beside
each gopi. Placing His hands on the shoulders of the gopis on both sides of
Him, He began to dance in their midst. The mystic expansions of Krwa
were not perceived by the gopis because Krwa appeared alone to each of
them. Each gopi thought that Krwa was dancing with her alone. Above that
wonderful dance flew many airplanes carrying the denizens of the heavenly
planets, who were very anxious to see the wonderful dance of Krwa with
the gopis. The Gandharvas and Kinnaras began to sing, and , accompanied
by their respective wives, all the Gandharvas began to shower flowers on
the dancers.
As the gopis and Krwa danced together, a very blissful musical sound
was produced from the tinkling of their bells, ornaments and bangles. It
appeared that Krwa was a greenish sapphire locket in the midst of a
golden necklace decorated with valuable stones. While Kr§!la and the gopis
danced they displayed extraordinary bodily features . The movements of
their legs, their placing their hands on one another, the movements of their
2 14
Description of the Rasa Dance 215
eyebrows, their smiling, the movements of the breasts of the gopis and
their clothes, their earrings, their cheeks, their hair with flowers-as they
sang and danced these combined together to appear like clouds, thunder,
snow and lightning. Kr  a's bodily features appeared just like a group of
clouds, their songs were like thunder, the beauty of the gopis appeared to
be just like lightning in the sky, and the drops of perspiration visible on
their faces appeared like falling snow. In this way, both the gopis and
Kr  a fully engaged in dancing.
The necks of the gopis became tinted with red due to their desire to
enjoy Kr  a more and more. To satisfy them, Kr  a began to clap His
hands in time with their singing. Actually the whole world is full of
Kr  a's singing, but it is appreciated in different ways by different kinds of
living entities. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gita: ye yatha mam
prapadyante. Kr  a is dancing, and every living entity is also dancing, but
there is a difference in the dancing in the spiritual world and in the material
world. This is expressed by the author of Caitanya-caritamrta, who says
that the master dancer is Kr  a and everyone is His servant. Everyone is
trying to imitate Kr  a's dancing. Those who are actually in Kr  a
consciousness respond rightly to the dancing of Kr  a: they do not try to
dance independently. But those in the material world try to imitate
Kr  a as the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The living entities are
dancing under the direction of Kr  a's maya and are thinking that they
are equal to Kr  a. But this is not a fact. In Krwa consciousness, this mis
conception is absent, for a person in Kr  a consciousness knows that Kr  a
is the supreme master and everyone is His servant. One has to dance to
please Kr  a, not to imitate or to become equal to the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. The gopis wanted to please Kr  a, and therefore as Krwa
sang, they responded and encouraged Him by saying, "Well done, well
done." Sometimes they presented beautiful music for His pleasure, and He
responded by praising their singing.
When some of the gopis became very tired from dancing and moving
their bodies, they placed their hands on the shoulders of Sri Kr  a. Then
their hair loosened and flowers fell to the ground. When they placed their
hands on Kr  a's shoulder, they became overwhelmed by the fragrance of
His body which emanated from the lotus, other aromatic flowers, and the
pulp of sandalwood. They became filled with attraction for Him, and they
began to kiss one another. Some gopis touched Kr  a cheek to cheek, and
Kr  a began to offer them chewed betel nuts from His mouth, which they
exchanged ·with great pleasure by kissing. And by accepting those betel
nuts, the gopis spiritually advanced.
216 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
The gopis became tired after long singing and dancing. Kr  a was dancing
beside them, and to alleviate their fatigue they took Sri Kr  a's hand and
placed it on their raised breasts. Kr  a's hand, as well as the breasts of the
gopis, are eternally auspicious; therefore when they combined, both of
them became spiritually enhanced. The gopis so enjoyed the company of
Kr  a, the husband of the goddess of fortune, that they forgot that they
had any other husband in the world, and upon being embraced by the arms
of Kr  a and dancing and singing with Him, they forgot everything. The
Srtmad-Bhagavatam thus describes the beauty of the gopis while they were
rasa dancing with Kr  a. There were lotus flowers over both their ears,
and their faces were decorated with sandalwood pulp. They wore tilaka,
and there were drops of sweat on their smiling mouths. From their feet
came the tinkling sound of ankle hells as well as bangles. The flowers
within their hair were falling to the lotus feet of Kr  a, and He was very
satisfied.
As stated in the Brahma-sarhhita, all these gopis are expansions of
Kr  a 's pleasure potency. Touching their bodies with His hands and looking
at their pleasing eyes, Krwa enjoyed the gopis exactly as a child enjoys
playing with the reflection of his body in a mirror. When Kr  a touched
the different parts of their bodies, the gopis felt surcharged with spiritual
energy. They could not adjust their loosened clothes, although they tried
to keep them properly. Their hair and garments became scattered, and
their ornaments loosened as they forgot themselves in company with
Krsna.
While Kr  a was enjoying the company of the gopis in the rasa dance,
the astonished demigods and their wives gathered in the sky. The moon,
being afflicted with a sort of lust, began to watch the dance and became
stunned with wonder. The gopis had prayed to the goddess Katyayani to
have Kr  a as their husband. Now Kr  a was fulfilling their desire by
expanding Himself in as many forms as there were gopis and enjoying
them exactly as a husband.
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami has remarked that Kr  a is self-sufficient-He is
atmarama. He doesn't need anyone else for His satisfaction. Because the
gopis wanted Kr  a as their husband, He fulfilled their desire. When Kr !la
saw that the gopis were tired from dancing with Him, He immediately
began to smear His hands over their faces so that their fatigue would he
satiated. In order to reciprocate the kind hospitality of Kr  a, the gopis
began to look at Him lwlngly. They were overjoyed by the auspicious
touch of the hand of Kr  a. Their smiling cheeks shone with beauty, and
they began to sing the glories of Kr !la with transcendental pleasure. As
Description of the Rasa Dance 217
pure devotees, the more the gopis enjoyed Kr§ a's company, the more thev
became enlightened with His glories, and thus they reciprocated With
Him. They wanted to satisfy Kr§ a by glorifying His transcendental
pastimes. Kr§ a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,. the master of all
masters, and the gopis wanted to worship Him for His unusual exhibition
of mercy upon them.
Both the gopis and Kr§ a entered the water of the Yamuna just to
relieve their fatigue from the rasa dance. The lily flower garlands around
the necks of the gopis were strewn to pieces due to their embracing the
body of Kr§ a, and the flowers were reddish from being smeared with the
kunkuma on their breasts. The bumblebees were humming about in order
to get honey from the flowers. Kr§ a and the gopis entered the water of
Yamuna just as an elephant enters a water tank with his many female
companions. Both the gopis and Kn a forgot their real identity, playing
in the water, enjoying each others' company and relieving the fatigue of
rasa dancing. The gopis began to splash water on the body of Kr§ a, all
the while smiling, and Krwa enj oyed this. As Kr§ a was taking pleasure in
the joking words and splashing water, the demigods in the heavenly
planets began to shower flowers. The demigods thus praised the super
excellent rasa dance of Kr§ a, the supreme enjoyer, and His pastimes with
the gopis in the water of Yam una.
After this, Lord Kn a and the gopis came out of the water and began to
stroll along the bank of the Yamuna, where a nice breeze was blowing,
carrying the aroma of different kinds of flowers over the water and land.
While strolling on the bank of the Yam una, Kr§ a recited various kinds of
poetry. He thus enjoyed the company of the gopis in the soothing moon
light of autumn.
Sex desire is especially excited in the autumn season, but the wonderful
thing about Kr§ a's association with the gopis is that there was no question
of sex desire. It was, as clearly stated in the Bhagavata description by
Sukadeva Gosvami, avaruddha-saurata[l, namely the sex impulse was
completely controlled. There is a distinction between Lord Kr§ a's dancing
with the gopis and the ordinary dancing of living entities within the
material world. In order to clear up further misconceptions about the rasa
dance and the affairs of Kr§ a and the gopis, Maharaja Parik§it, the hearer
of Srimad-Bhagavatam, told Sukadeva Gosvami, " Kr§ a appeared on the
earth to establish the regulative principles of religion and to curb the
predominance of irreligion. But the behavior of Kr§ a and the gopis might
encourage irreligious principles in the material world. I am simply surprised
that He would act in such a way, enjoying the company of others' wives in
218 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
the dead of night," This statement of Maharaja Parlk it's was very much
appreciated by Sukadeva Gosvami. The answer anticipates the abominable
acts of the Mayavadi impersonalists who place themselves in the position
of Kr p.a and enjoy the company of young girls and women.
The basic Vedic injunctions never allow a person to enjoy sex with any
woman except one's own wife. Kr p.a's appreciation of the gopis appeared
to be distinctly in violation of these rules. Maharaja Parlk it understood the
total situation from Sukadeva Gosvami, yet to further clear the transcen
dental nature of Kr p.a and the gopis in rasa dance, he expressed his
surprise. This is very important in order to check the unrestricted associa
tion with women by the prakrta-sahajiyii.
In his statement, Maharaja Parik it has used several important words
which require clarification. The first word, jugupsitam, means abominable.
The first doubt of Maharaja Parik it was as follows: Lord KHp.a is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead who has advented< Himself to establish
religious principles. Why then did He mix with others' wives in the dead of
night and enjoy dancing, embracing and kissing? According to the Vedic
injunctions, this is not allowed. Also, when the gop is first came to Him, He
gave instructions to them to return to their homes. To call the wives of
other persons or young girls and enjoy dancing with them is certainly
abominable according to the Vedas. Why should Kr p.a have done this?
Another word used here is iiptakiima. Some may take it for granted that
Kr p.a was very lusty among young girls, but Parik it Maharaja said that
this was not possible. He could not be lusty. First of all, from the material
calculation He was only eight years old. At that age a boy cannot be lusty.
Aptakiima means that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is self-satisfied.
Even if He were lusty, He doesn't need to.take help from others to satisfy
His lusty desires. The next point is that, although not lusty Himself, He
might have been induced by the lusty desires of the gopis. But Maharaja
Parik it then used another word, yadu-pati, which indicates that Kr p.a is
the most exalted personality in the dynasty of the Y adus. The kings in the
dynasty of Y adu were considered to be the most pious, and their descen
dants were also like that. Having taken birth in that family, how could
Kr p.a have been induced, even by the gopis ? It is concluded, therefore,
that it was not possible for Kr p.a to do anything abominable. But Maharaja
PanK. it was in doubt as to why Kr p.a acted in that way. What was the real
purpose? Another word Maharaja Parik it used when he addressed
Sukadeva Gosvami is suvrata, which means to take a vow to enact pious
activities. Sukadeva Gosvami was an educated b rahmaciiri, and under the
circumstances, it was not possible for him to indulge in sex. This is strictly
Description of the Rasa Dance 219
prohibited for brahmacaris, and what to speak of a brahmacari like
Sukadeva Gosvami. But because the circumstances of the rasa dance were
very suspect, Maharaja Parik§it inquired for clarification from Sukadeva
Gosvami. Sukadeva Gosvami immediately replied that transgressions of
religious principles by the supreme controller testify to His great power.
For example, fire can consume any abominable thing; that is the manifes
tation of the supremacy of fire. Similarly, the sun can absorb water from
a urinal or from stool, and the sun is not polluted; rather, due to the
influence of sunshine, the polluted, contaminated place becomes disin
fected and sterilized.
One may also argue that since Kr§Va is the supreme authority, His
activities should be followed. In answer to this question, Sukadeva Gosvami
has very clearly said that isvararzam, or the supreme controller, may some
times violate !-lis instructions, but this is only possible for the controller
Himself, not for the followers. Unusual and uncommon activities by the
controller can never by imitated. Sukadeva Gosvami warned that the
conditioned followers, who are not actually in control, should never even
imagine imitating the uncommon activities of the controller. A Mayavadi
philosopher may falsely claim to be God or Kr IJa, but he cannot actually
act like Kr§ Ja. He can persuade his followers to falsely imitate rasa dance,
but he is unable to lift Govardhana Hill. We have many experiences in the
past of Mayavadi rascals deluding their followers by posing themselves as
Kr§IJa in order to enjoy rasa-lila. In many instances they were checked by
the government, arrested and punished. In Orissa, Thakur Bhaktivinode
also punished a so-called incarnation of Vi l)U, who was imitating rasa-lila
with young girls. There were many complaints against him. At that time,
Bhaktivinode Thakur was magistrate, and the government deputed him to
deal with that rascal, and he punished him very severely. The rasa-lila dance
cannot be imitated by anyone. Sukadeva Gosvami warns that one should
not even think of imitating it. He specifically mentions that if, out of
foolishness, one tries to imitate Kr  ta's rasa dance, he will be killed, just
like a person who wants to imitate Lord Siva's drinking of an ocean of
poison. Lord Siva drank an ocean of poison and kept it within his throat.
The poison made his throat turn blue; and therefore Lord Siva is called
Nilaka tta. But if any ordinary person tries to imitate Lord Siva b y drinking
poison or smoking gaiija, he is sure to be vanquished and will die within a
very short time. Lord Sri Kr  1a's dealing with the gopis was under special
circumstances.
Most of the gopis in their previous lives were great sages, expert in the
studies of the Vedas, and when Lord Kr§va appeared as Lord Ramacandra,
220 Kr 9-a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
they wanted to enjoy with Him. Lord Ramacandra gave them the bene
diction that their desires would be fulfilled when He would appear as
Kr  a. Therefore the desire of the gopis to enjoy the appearance of Lord
Kr  a was long cherished. So they approached goddess Katyayani to have
Kr  a as their husband. There are many other circumstances also which
testify to the supreme authority of Kr  a and show that He is not bound
to the rules and regulations of the material world. In special cases, He acts
as He likes to favor His devotees. This is only possible for Him, because He
is the supreme controller. People in general should follow the instructions
of Lord Kr  a as given in the Bhagavad-gita and should not even imagine
imitating Lord Kr  a in the rasa dance.
Kr  a's lifting of Govardhana Hill, His killing great demons like Piitana
and others are all obviously extraordinary activities. Similarly, the rasa
dance is also an uncommon activity and cannot be imitated by any
ordinary man. An ordinary person engaged in his occupational duty, like
Arjuna, should execute his duty for the satisfaction of Kr  a ; that is within
his power. Arjuna was a fighter, and Kr  a wanted him to fight for His
satisfaction. Arjuna agreed, although at first he was not willing to fight.
Duties are required for ordinary persons. They should not jump up and
try to imitate Kr  a and indulge in rasa-lilii and thus bring about their
ruin. One should know with certainty that Kr  a had no personal interest
in whatever He did for the benediction of the gopis. As stated in the
Bhagavad-gita, na mam kannar-i limpanti: Kr  a never enjoys or suffers
the result of His activities. Therefore it is not possible for Him to act
irreligiously. He is transcendental to all activities and religious principles.
He is untouched by the modes of material nature. He is the supreme
controller of all living entities, either in human society, in the demigod
society in heavenly planets, or in lower forms of life. He is the supreme
controller of all living entities and of material nature ; therefore, He has
nothing to do with religious or irreligious principles.
Sukadeva Gosvami further concludes that the great sages and devotees,
who are washed clean of all conditional life, can move freely even within
the contamination of material nature by keeping Kr  a the Supreme
Personality of Godhead within their hearts. In this way also they do not
become subject to the laws of pleasure and pain in the modes of material
nature. How, then, is it possible for Kr  a, who appears in His own internal
potency, to be subjected to the laws of kanna?
In the Bhagavad-gita the Lord clearly says that whenever He appears He
does so by His internal potency ; He is not forced to accept a body by the
laws of karma like an ordinary living entity. Every other living entity is
Description of the Rasa Dance 22 1
forced to accept a certain type of body by his previous actions. But when
Kr  a appears, He always appears in a body ; it is not forced upon Him by
the action of His past deeds. His body is a vehicle for His transcendental
pleasure which is enacted by His internal potency. He has no obligation to
the laws of karma. The Mayavadi monist must accept a certain type of
body, being forced by the laws of nature ; therefore, his claim to be one
with Kr  a or God is only theoretical. Such persons who claim to be equal
with Krwa and indulge in rasa-lilii create a dangerous situation for the
people in general. Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is already
present as Supersoul within the bodies of the gopis and their husbands. He
is the guide of all living entities, as is confirmed in the Katha Upani ad,
nityo nityanarh cetanas cetananam. The Supersoul directs the individual
soul to act, and the Supersoul is the actor and witness of all action.
It is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gitii that Kr va is present in everyone's
heart, and from Him come all action, remembrance and forgetfulness. He
is the original person to be known by Vedic knowledge. He is the author
of Vedanta philosophy, and He knows the Vedanta philosophy perfectly
well. The so-called V edantists and Mayavadis cannot understand Kr  la as
He is ; they simply mislead followers by imitating the actions of Kr  a in
an unauthorized way. Kr  a, the Supersoul of everyone, is already within
the body of everyone ; therefore if He sees someone or embraces someone
there is no question of propriety.
Some ask that if Kr !la is self-sufficient, why should He at all manifest
pastimes with the gopis which are disturbing to the so-called moralists of
the world? The answer is that such activities show special mercy to the
fallen, conditioned souls. The gopis are also expansions of His internal
energy, but because Kr  a wanted to exhibit the riisa-lilii, they also
appeared as ordinary human beings. In the material world, pleasure is
ultimately manifested in the sex attraction between man and woman. The
man lives simply to be attracted by women, and the woman lives simply to
be attracted by men. That is the basic principle of material life. As soon as
these attractions are combined, people become more and more implicated
in material existence. In order to show them special favor, Kr  a ex
hibited this rasa-lilii dance. It is just to captivate the conditioned soul.
Since they are very much attracted by sexology, they can enjoy the same
life with Krsna and thus become liberated from the material condition. In
the Second Canto of Srimad-Bhagavatam, Maharaja Parik it also explains
that the pastimes and activities of Lord Kr  a are medicine for the
conditioned souls. If they simply hear about Kr va they become relieved
from the material disease. They are addicted to material enjoy.tpent and
222 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
are accustomed to reading sex literature, but by hearing these transcen
dental pastimes of Kr  a with the gopis, they will be relieved from ma
terial contamination.
How they should hear and from whom is also explained by Sukadeva
Gosvami. The difficulty is that the whole world is full of Mayavadis, and
when they become professional reciters of Srimad-Bhiigavatam, and when
people, without knowing the effect of the Mayavada philosophy, hear
from such persons, they become confused. Discussion of riisa-lilii among
people in general is not recommended because they are affected by the
Mayavada philosophy, but if one who is advanced explains, and people
hear from him, certainly the hearers will be gradually elevated to the
position of Kr  a consciousness and liberated from materially contami
nated life.
Another importaht point is that all the gopis who danced with Kr  a
were not in their material bodies. They danced with Kr  la in their spiritual
bodies. All their husbands thought that their wives were sleeping by their
sides. The so-called husbands of the gopis were already enamored by the
influence of the external energy of Kr  a ; so b y dint of this very energy
they could not understand that their wives had gone to dance with Krwa.
What then is the basis of accusing Kr  a of dancing with others' wives?
The bodies of the gopis, which were their husbands', were lying in bed,
but the spiritual parts and parcels of Kr  a were dancing with Him. Kr  a
is the supreme person, the whole spirit, and He danced with the spiritual
bodies of the gopis. There is therefore no reason to accuse Krwa in any
way.
After the riisa dance was over, the night turned into the briihma
muhiirta (the night of Brahma, a very, very long period, as mentioned in
the Bhagavad-gitii). The b riihma-muhiirta takes place about one and a half
hours before sunrise. It is recommended that one should rise from bed at
that time and, after finishing daily ablutions, take to spiritual activities
by performing Mangala-iiriitrika and chanting the Hare Kr  a man tra. This
period is very convenient for the execution of spiritual activities. When
that auspicious moment arrived, Kr  a asked the gopis to leave. Although
they were not willing to quit His company, they were very obedient and
dear to Him. As soon as Kr  a asked them to go home, they immediately
left and returned home. Sukadeva Gosvami concludes this episode of riisa
lilii by pointing out that if a person hears from the right source of the
pastimes of Kr  a, who is Vi  u Himself, and the gopis, who are expan
sions of His energy, then he will be relieved from the most dangerous type
of disease, namely lust. If one actually hears riisa-lilii, he will become
Description of the Rasa Dance 223
completely freed from the lusty desire of sex life and elevated to the
highest level of spiritual understanding. Generally, because they hear
from Mayavadis and they themselves are Mayavadis, people become more
and more implicated in sex life. The conditioned soul should hear the
r&;a-lilii dance from an authorized spiritual master and be trained by him
so that he can understand the whole situation; thus one can be elevated to
the highest standard of spiritual life, otherwise one will be implicated. Ma
terial lust is a kind of hearL disease, and to cure the material heart disease
of the conditioned soul, it is recommended that one should hear, but not
from the impersonalist rascals. If one hears from the right sources with
right understanding, then his situation will be different.
Sukadeva Gosvami has used the word sraddhanvita for one who is
trained in the spiritual life. Sraddhii, or faith, is the beginning. One who
has developed his faith in Kr  a as the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
the Supreme Spirit Soul, can both describe and hear. Sukadeva also uses
the word anusnruyat. One must hear from disciplic succession. Anu
means following, and anu means always. So one must always follow the
disciplic succession and not hear from any stray professional reciter,
Mayavadi or ordinary man. A nusnwyat means that one must hear from
an authorized person who is in the disciplic succession and is always
engaged in Kr  a consciousness. When a person wants to hear in this way,
then the effect will be sure. By hearing rasa-lila, one will be elevated to
the highest position of spiritual life.
Sukadeva Gosvami uses two specific words, bhaktim and pariim. Bhak
tim pariim means execution of devotional service above the neophyte
stage. Those who are simply attracted to temple worship but do not know
the philosophy of bhakti are in the neophyte stage. That sort of bhakti is
not the perfectional stage. The perfectional stage of bhakti, or devotional
service, is completely free from material contamination. The most dan
gerous aspect of contamination is lust or sex life. Bhaktim param devo
tional service is so potent that the more one advances in this line, the more
he loses his attraction for material life. One who is actually deriving bene
fit from hearing rasa-lila dance surely achieves the transcendental position.
He surely loses all traces of lust in his heart.
Snla Visvanatha Cakravarti 'fhakur points out that according to Bhaga
vad-gitii, the Brahma day and Brahma night are periods of solar years
expanding to 4,300,000 multiplied by l ,000. According to Visvanatha
Cakravarti 'fhakur, the rasa dance was performed during the long period
of Brahma's night, but the gopis could not understand that. In order to
fulfill their desire, Kr  a extended the night to cover such a great period
224 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
of time. One may ask how this was possible, ancl Visvanatha Cakravarti
'fhakur reminds us that Kr J}a, although bound by a small rope, could
show His mother the whole universe within His mouth. How was this
possible? The answer is that He can do anything for the pleasure of His
devotees. Similarly, because the gopis wanted to enjoy Krwa, they were
given the opportunity to associate with Him for a long period. This was
done according to His promise. When Kr l}a stole the garments of the gopis
while they were taking bath at Cirghat on Yamuna, Kr l}a promised to
fulfill their desire in some future night. In one night, therefore, they
enjoyed the company of Krwa as their beloved husband, but that night
was not an ordinary night. It was a night of Brahma, and lasted millions
and millions of years. Everything is possible for Kr J}a, for He is the
supreme controller.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-second Chapter of
Kr J}a, "Desc ription of the Rasa Dance. "
33 I Vidyadhara Liberated
and the Demon S aitkhasura Killed
Once upon a time , the cowherd men of Vrndavana, headed by Nanda
Maharaj a , desired to go to Ambikavana to perform the Sivariitri per
formance. The riisa-lilii was performed during the autumn, and after that
the next big ceremony is Holi or the Dolayiitrii ceremony. Between the
Dolayiitrii ceremony and the riisa-lilii ceremony there is one important
ceremony which is called Sivariitri, which is especially observed by the
Saivites, or devotees of Lord Siva. But sometimes the V aisnavas also ob
serve this ceremony because they accept L ord Siva as . .the foremost
Vai !lava. But the function of Sivariitri is not observed very regularly by
the b hak tas, or devotees of Krsna. Under the circumstances, it is stated in
Srimad-Bhiigavatam that the ·  wherd men headed by N anda Maharaj a
" once upon a time desired. " That means that they were not regularly
observing the Sivariitri function, but that once upon a time they wanted to
go to Ambikavana out of curiosity. Ambikavana is situated somewhere
in the Guj arat province. Ambikavana is said to be situated on the river
Sarasvati, yet we do not find any Sarasvati River in the Guj arat province ;
the only river there is Savarmati. In India, all · the big places of pilgrimage
are situated on nice rivers like the Ganges, Y am una, Sarasvati, N armada,
Godavari, Kaveri, etc. Ambikavana was situated on the bank of Sarasvati,
and all the cowherd men and N anda Maharaj a went there.
They very devotedly began to worship the deity of L ord Siva and
Ambika. It is the general practice that wherever there is a temple of Lord
Siva, there must be another temple of Ambika ( or Durga) because Ambika
is the wife of L ord Siva and is the most exalted of chaste women. She
doesn't live outside the association of her husband. After reaching Ambika
vana, the cowherd men of V rndavana first bathed themselves in the River
Sarasvati. If one goes to any place of pilgrimage , his first duty is to take a
bath and sometimes to shave his head. That is the first business. After
225
226 Kr  ' the Supreme Personality of Godhead
taking bath, they worshiped the D eities and then distributed charity in the
holy places.
According to the Vedic system, charity is given to the b riihmarzas. It is
stated in the Vedic siistras that only the b riihmm;as and the sannyiisis can
accept charity. The cowherd men from Vrndavana gave cows decorated
with golden ornaments and beautiful garlands. The b riihmarzas are given
charity because they are not engaged in any business profession. They are
supposed to be engaged in brahminical occupations, as described in the
Bhagavad-g'itii- namely, they must be very learned and must perform
austerity and penances. They must not only themselves be learned, but
they must also teach others. Briihmar-as are not meant to be b riihmm;ws
alone ; they should create other b riihmarzas also. If a man is found who
agrees to· become a b riihmar-a's disciple, he is also given the chance to
become a briihmara. The b riihmara is always engaged in the worship of
Lord Vi pu. Therefore the b riihmaras are eligible to accept all kinds of
charity. But if the b riihmarzas receive excess charity, they are to distribute
it for the service of Vi pu. In the Vedic scripture, therefore, one is recom
mended to give in charity to the b riihmarzas, and by so doing one pleases
Lord Vi pu and all the demigods.
The pilgrims take bath, worship the Deity, and give in charity; they are
also recommended to fast one day. They should go to a place of pilgrimage
and stay there at least for three days. The first day is spent fasting, and at
night they can drink a little water because water does not break the fast.
The cowherd men, headed by N anda Maharaja, spent that night on the
bank of the Sarasvati. They fasted all day and drank a little water at night.
But while they were taking their rest, a great serpent from the nearby
forest appeared before them and hungrily began to swallow up N anda
Maharaja. Nanda began to cry helplessly, "My dear son, Kr pa, please
come and save me from this danger! This serpent is swallowing me ! " When
N anda Maharaja cried for help, all the cowherd men got up and saw what
was happening. They immediately took up burning logs and began to beat
the snake to kill it. But in spite of being beaten with burning logs, the
serpent was not about to give up swallowing N anda Maharaja.
At that time Kr pa appeared on the scene and touched the serpent with
His lotus feet. I mmediately upon being touched by the lotus feet of Kr !la,
the serpent shed its reptilian body and appeared as a very beautiful demi
god named V idyadhara. His bodily features were so beautiful that he
appeared to be worshipable. There was a luster and effulgence emanating
from his body, and he was garlanded with a gold necklace. He offered
obeisances to Lord Kr !la and stood before Him with great humility. Krwa
Vidyadhara Liberated and Satikhasura Killed 227
then asked the demigod, "You appear to be a very nice demigod and to be
favored by the goddess of fortune. How is it that you performed such
abominable activities, and how did you get the body of a serpent?" The
demigod then began to narrate the story of his previous life.
"My dear Lord," he said, "in my previous life I was named Vidyadhara
and was known all over the world for my beauty. Because I was a cele
brated personality, I used to travel all over in my airplane. While traveling,
I saw a great sage named AngiriL He was very ugly, and because I was very
proud of my beauty, I laughed at him. Due to this sinful action, I was
condemned by the great sage to assume the form of a serpent.''
One should note here that before being favored by Kr tJ.a, a person is
always under the modes of material nature, however elevated he may be
materially. Vidyadhara was a materially elevated demigod, and he was
very beautiful. He also held a great material position and was able to travel
all over by airplane. Yet he was condemned to become a serpent in his
next life. Any materially elevated person can be condemned to an abomi
nable species of life if he is not careful. It is a misconception that after
reaching the human body one is never degraded. Vidyadhara himself
states that even though he was a demigod, he was condemned to become
a serpent.· But because he was touched by the lotus feet of Kr  a, he
immediately came to Kr  a consciousness. He admitted, however, that in
his previous life he was actually sinful. A Kr  a conscious person knows
that he is always the servant of the servant of Kr  a ; he is most insignifi
cant, and whatever good he does is by the grace of Kr  a and the spiritual
master.
The demigod Vidyadhara continued to speak to Sri Kr  a. " Because I
was very proud of the exquisite beauty of my body," he said, "I derided
the ugly features of the great sage Angirii. He cursed me for my sin, and
I became a snake. Now I consider that this curse b y the sage was not at all
a curse ; it was a great benediction for me. Had he not cursed me, I would
not have assumed the body of a serpent and would not have been kicked
by Your lotus feet and thus freed from all material contamination."
In material existence, four things are very valuable: to be born in a
decent family, to be very rich, to be very learned, and to be very beautiful.
These are considered to be material assets. Unfortunately, withput Kr  a
consciousness, these material assets sometimes become sources of sin and
degradation. Despite Vidyadhara's being a demigod and having a beautiful
body, he was condemned to the body of a snake due to pride. A snake is
considered to be the most cruel and envious living entity, but those who
are human beings and are envious of others are considered to be even more
228 Kr !la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
vicious than snakes. The snake can be subdued or controlled by charming
mantras and herbs, but a person who is envious cannot be controlled by
anyone.
"My dear Lord," Vidyadhara continued, "Now since I think I have
become freed from all kinds of sinful activities, I am asking Your per
mission to return to my abode, the heavenly planet." This request
indicates that persons who are attached to fruitive activities, desiring
promotion to the comforts of higher planetary systems, cannot achieve
their ultimate goal of life without the sanction of the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. It is also stated in the Bhagavad-gita that the less intelligent
want to achieve material benefits and therefore worship different kinds of
demigods, but they actually · get the benediction from the demigods
through the permission of Lord Viwu, or Kr va. Demigods have no power
to bestow material profit. Even if one is attached to material benediction,
he can worship Kr !la the Supreme Personality of Godhead and ask Him.
Krwa is completely able to give even material benediction. There is a
difference, however, in asking material benediction from the demigods
and from Kr pa. Dhruva Maharaja worshiped the Supreme Personality of
Godhead for material benediction, but when he actually achieved the
favor of the Supreme Lord and saw Him, he was so satisfied that he
refused to accept any material benediction. The intelligent person does
not ask favors from or worship the demigods; he directly becomes Kr pa
conscious, and if he has any desire for material benefit, he asks Kr !la, not
the demigods.
Vidyadhara, awaiting permission of Kr !la to return to the heavenly
planets, said, "Now because I am touched by Your lotus feet, I am
relieved from all kinds of material pangs. You are the most powerful of
all mystics. You are the original Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are
the master of all the devotees. You are the provider of the planetary
systems, and therefore I am asking Your permission. You may accept me
as fully surrendered unto Y ou . I know very well that persons who are
constantly engaged in chanting Your holy name attain release from all
sinful reactions, and certainly persons who are fortunate enough to be
personally touched by Your lotus feet are freed. Therefore I am sure that
I am now relieved from the curse of the b rahmm)a simply by being
touched by Your lotus feet."
In this way, Vidyadhara got permission from Lord Kr !la to return to
his home in the higher planetary system. After receiving this honor, he
began to circumambulate the Lord. And after offering his respectful
obeisances unto Him, he returned to his heavenly planet. Thus Nanda
Vidyadhara Liberated and Satikhasura Killed 229
Maharaja also became relieved from the imminent danger of being devoured
by the snake.
The cowherd men who had come to execute the ritualistic function of
worshiping Lord Siva and Ambika finished their business and prepared to
return to V rndavana. While returning, they recalled the wonderful activities
of Krwa. By relating the incident of Vidyadhara's deliverance, they became
more attached to Kr  a. They had come to worship Lord Siva and Ambika,
but they became more and more attached to Krwa. Similarly, the gopis also
worshiped goddess Katyayani to become more and more attached to Kr  a.
It is stated in the Bhagavad-gita that persons who are attached to wor
shiping demigods like Lord Brahma, Siva, Indra and Candra, for some
personal benefit, are less intelligent and have forgotten the real purpose of
life. But the cowherd men, inhabitants of V rndavana, were no ordinary
men. Whatever they did, they did for Kr  a. If one worships demigods like
Lord Siva and Lord Brahma to become more attached to Kr  a, that is
approved. But if one goes to the demigods for some personal benefit, that
is condemned.
After this incident, on a very pleasant night, both Kr  a and His elder
brother Balarama, who are inconceivably powerful, went into the forest of
Vrndavana. They were accompanied by the damsels of Vrajabhumi, and
they began to enjoy each other's company. The young damsels of Vraja
were very nicely dressed and anointed with pulp of sandalwood and deco
rated with flowers. The moon was shining in the sky, surrounded by
glittering stars, and the breeze was blowing, bearing the aroma of nwllika
flowers, and the bumblebees were mad after the aroma. 'Faking advantage
of the pleasing atmosphere, both Kr  a and Balarama began to sing very
melodiously. The damsels became so absorbed in their rhythmical song
that they almost forgot themselves; their hair loosened, their dresses
slackened, and their garlands began to fall to the ground.
At that time, while they were so much absorbed, almost in madness, a
demon associate of Kuvera (the treasurer of the heavenly planets) appeared
on the scene. The demon's name was Sankhasura because on his head
there was a valuable jewel resembling a conchshell. Just as the two sons of
Kuvera were puffed up over their wealth and opulence and did not care
for Narada Muni's presence, this Sankhasura was also puffed up over
material opulence. He thought that Kr  a and Balarama were two ordinary
cowherd boys enjoying the company of many beautiful girls. Generally,
in the material world, a person with riches thinks that all beautiful women
should be enjoyed by him. Sankhasura also thought that, since he belonged
to the rich community of Kuvera, he, not Kr  a and Balarama, should
230 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
enjoy the company of so many beautiful girls. He therefore decided to
take charge of them. He appeared before Kr§!la and Balarama and the
damsels of V raja and began to lead the girls away to the north. He
commanded them as if he were their proprietor and husband, despite the
presence of Kr§!la and Balarama. Being forcibly taken away by Sankhasura,
the damsels of Vraja began to call the names of Kr§!la and Balarama for
protection. The two brothers immediately began to follow them, taking up
big logs in Their hands. "Don't be afraid, don't be afraid," They called to
the gopi:s. "We are coming at once to chastise this demon." Very quickly
They reached Sankhasura. Thinking the brothers too powerful, Sankhasura
left the company of the gopi:s and ran for fear of his life. But Kr§!la would
not let him go. He entrusted the gopi:s to the care of Balarama and followed
Sankhasura wherever he fled. Kr§!la wanted to take the valuable jewel
resembling a conchshell from the head of the demon. After following him
a very short distance, Kr !la caught him, struck his head with His fist and
killed him. He then took the valuable jewel and returned. In the presence
of all the damsels of V raja, He presented the valuable jewel to His elder
brother Balarama.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-third Chapter of
Kr !la, "Vidyiidhara Liberated and the Demon Saiikhiisura Killed. "
34 I The Gopis' Feelings of Separation
The gopis of V rndavana were so attached to Kr  a that they were not
satisfied simply with the rasa dance at night. They wanted to associate
with Him and enjoy His company during the daytime also. When Kr  a
went to the forest with His cowherd boy friends and cows , the gopis did
not physically take part, but their hearts went with Him. And because
their hearts went, they were able to enj oy His company through strong
feelings of separation. To acquire this strong feeling of separation is the
teaching of Lord C aitanya and His direct disciplic succession of Gosvamis.
When we are not in physical contact with Kr  a, we can associate with
Him like the gopis, through feelings of separation. Kr  a 's transcendental
form , qualities, pastimes , and entourage are all identical with Him. There
are nine different kinds of devotional service. D evotional service to Kr  a
in feelings of separation elevates the devotee to the highest perfectional
level, to the level of the gopis.
It is stated in Srinivasacarya's prayer to the six Gosvamis that they left
the material opulences of government service and the princely status of
life and went to V rndavana, where they lived j ust like ordinary mendicants,
begging from door to door . But they were so much enriched with the
gopis ' feelings of separation that they enj oyed transcendental pleasure at
every moment . Similarly, when L ord C aitanya was at J agannatha Puri, He
was in the role of  adhara i, feeling the separation of Krwa. Those who
are in the disciplic succession of the Madhva-Gau iya-sampradaya should
also feel the separation of Kr  a, worship His transcendental form, and
discuss His transcendental teachings, His pastimes, His qualities, His
entourage and His associations. The spiritual masters should enrich the
devotees to the highest devotional perfection. Feeling constant separation
while engaged in the service of the L ord is the perfection of Kr p.a
conscwusness.
2 3 1
232 Kf :t;ta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
The gopis used to discuss Kr rta amongst themselves, and their talks
were as follows. "My dear friends," one gopi said, "do you know that
when Kr rta lies on the ground He rests on His left elbow, and His head
rests on His left hand. He moves His attractive eyebrows while playing His
flute with His delicate fingers, and the sound He produces creates such a
nice atmosphere that the denizens of the heavenly planets, who travel in
space with their wives and beloved, stop their airplanes, for they are
stunned by the vibration of the flute. The wives of the demigods who
are seated in the planes then become very much ashamed of their singing
and musical qualifications. N ot only that, but they become afflicted
with conjugal love, and their hair and tightened dresses immediately
loosen."
Another gopi said, "My dear friends, Kr§rta is so beautiful that the
goddess of fortune always remains on His chest, and He is always adorned
with a golden necklace. Beautiful Krwa plays His flute in order to enliven
the hearts of many devotees. He is the only friend of the suffering living
entities. When He plays His flute, all the cows and other animals of
Vrndavana, although engaged in eating, simply take a morsel of food in
their mouths and stop chewing. Their ears raise up and they become
stunned. They do not appear alive but like painted animals. Kr rta's flute
playing is so attractive that even the animals become enchanted, and what
to speak of ourselves. "
Another gopi said, " M y dear friends, not only living animals, but even
inanimate objects like the rivers and lakes of v rndavana also become
stunned when Kr rta passes with peacock feathers on His head and His
body smeared with the minerals of Vrndavana. With leaves and flowers
decorating His body, He looks like some hero. When He plays on His flute
and calls the cows with Balarama, the River Yam una stops flowing and
waits for the air to carry dust from His lotus feet. The River Yamuna is
unfortunate like us;it does not get Kr§rta's mercy. The river simply remains
stunned, stopping its waves just as we also stop crying out of frustration
for Krsna.". . .
In the absence of Kr rta the gopis were constantly shedding tears, but
sometimes, when they expected that Kr§rta was coming, they would stop
crying. But when they saw that Kr§rta was not coming, then again they
would become frustrated and begin to cry. Kr rta is the original Personality
of Godhead, the origin of all Vi§rt-U forms, and the cowherd boys are all
demigods. Lord Vi§rt-U is always worshiped and surrounded by different
demigods like Lord Siva, Lord Brahma, Indra, Candra, and others. When
Krwa traveled through the V rndavana forest or walked on the Govardhana
Akrilra saw Balarama turned into Se a Naga and Kr l)a turned into Maha-Vi l)u.
(p. 255 )

" 0 dear D amodara ! Dear Madhava ! " ( p . 254)

The audience was not very satisfied because the wrestlers did not appear to be equally matched.
(p . 275 )

Simply from the strokes of His fist, Kamsa lost his vital force . (p. 278)
The florist begged from the Lord that he might remain His eternal servant. ( p . 265)
The Gopis' Feelings of Separation 233
Hill, He was accompanied by the cowherd boys. While walking, He played
His flute, just to call His cows. Just b y His association, the trees, plants and
other vegetation in the forest immediately became Krwa conscious. A
Kr tla conscious person sacrifices everything for Kr tla. Although trees and
plants are not very advanced in consciousness, by the association of Kr tla
and His friends they also become Kr tla conscious. They then want to
deliver everything-whatever they have-their fruits, flowers, and the honey
incessantly falling from their branches.
When Kr tla walked on the bank of the Yamuna, H e was seen nicely
decorated with tilaka on His head. He was garlanded with different kinds
of forest flowers, and His body was smeared by the pulp of sandalwood
and tulasi leaves. The bumblebees became mad after the treasure and
sweet nectar of the atmosphere. Being pleased by the humming sound of
the bees, Kr tla would play His flute, and together the sounds became so
sweet to hear that the aquatics, the cranes, swans and ducks and other
birds were charmed. Instead of swimming or flying, they became stunned.
They closed their eyes and entered a trance of meditation in worship of
Krsna .. . .
One gopi said, "My dear friend, Kr tla and Balarama are nicely dressed
with earrings and pearl necklaces. They enj oy Themselves on the top of
Govardhana Hill, and everything becomes absorbed in transcendental
pleasure when Kr tla plays on His flute, charming the whole created
manifestation. When He plays, the clouds stop their loud thundering, out
of fear of Him. Rather than disturb the vibration of His flute, they
respond with mild thunder and so congratulate Krwa, their friend."
Kr tla is accepted as the friend of the cloud because both the cloud
and Kr tla satisfy the people when they are disturbed. When the people
are burning due to excessive heat, the cloud satisfies them with rain.
Similarly, when people in materialistic life become disturbed by the
blazing fire of material pangs, Kr tla gives them relief. The cloud and
Kr tla, having the same bodily color also, are considered to b e friends.
Desiring to congratulate its superior friend, the cloud poured not water,
but small flowers and covered the head of Kr tla to protect Him from the
scorching sunshine.
One of the gopis told mother Yasoda, "My dear mother, your son is
very expert among the cowherd boys. He knows all the different arts, how
to tend the cows and how to play the flute. He composes His own songs,
and to sing them He puts His flute to His mouth. When He plays, either
in the morning or in the evening, all the demigods, like Lord Siva, Brahma,
Indra and Candra, bow their heads and listen with great attention. Although
234 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
they are very learned and expert , they cannot understand the musical
arrangements of Kr  a's flute . They simply listen attentively and try to
understand, but become bewildered and nothing more . "
Another gopi said, "My dear friend, when Kr  a returns home with His
cows, the footprint of the soles of His feet-with flag, thunderbolt, trident,
and lotus flower-relieves the pain the earth feels when the cows traverse
it. He walks in a stride which is so attractive, and He carries His flute. Just
by looking at Him we become lusty to enj oy His company. At that time,
our movements cease. We become just like trees and stand perfectly still.
We even forget what we look like. "
Kr pa had many thousands o f cows, and they were divided into groups
according to their colors . They were also differently named according to
color. When He would return from the pasturing ground, He would find
all the cows gathered. As V ai pavas count 1 08 beads, which represent the
1 08 individual gopis, so Krwa would also chant 1 08 different groups of
cows.
"When Krwa returns, He is garlanded with tulasi leaves," a gopi
describes Him to a friend. "He puts His hand on the shoulder of a cowherd
boy friend, and begins to blow His transcendental flute. The wives of the
black deer become enchanted upon hearing the vibration of His flute,
which resembles the vibration of the virzii. The deer come to Kr pa and
become so charmed that they stand still, forgetting their homes and
husbands. Like us, who are enchanted by the ocean of the transcendental
qualities of Krwa, the she-deer become enchanted by the vibration of His
flute. "
Another gopi told mother Yasoda, "My dear mother, when your son
returns home, He decorates Himself with the buds of the k unda flower,
and just to enlighten and gladden His friends , He blows His flute. The
breeze blowing from the south pleases the atmosphere because it is fragrant
and very cool. D emigods like the Gandharvas and Siddhas take advantage
of this atmosphere and offer prayers to Kr pa by sounding their bugles
and drums. Kr pa is very kind to the inhabitants of V raj abhumi, V rndavana,
and when He returns with His cows and friends, He is remembered as the
lifter of G ovardhana Hill. Taking advantage of this opportunity, the most
exalted demigods like Lord Brahma and L ord Siva come down to offer
their evening prayers, and they accompany the cowherd boys in glorifying
the qualities of Kr pa.
"Kr  ta is compared with the moon, born in the ocean of the womb of
D evaki. When He returns in the evening, it appears that He is fatigued, but
He still tries to gladden the inhabitants of V rndavana by His auspicious
The Gopis' Feelings of Separation 235
presence. When Kr  a returns, garlanded with flowers, His face looks
beautiful. He walks into V rndavana with a stride just like the elephant
and slowly enters His home. Upon His return, the men, women, and cows
of Vrndavana immediately forget the scorching heat of the day."
Such descriptions of Kr  a's transcendental pastimes and activities were
remembered by the gopis during His absence from V rndavana. They give
us some idea of Kr  a 's attraction. Everyone and t?verything is attracted
to Kr  a-that is the perfect description of Kr  a's attraction. The example
of the gopis is very instructive to persons who are trying to be absorbed in
Kr  a· consciousness. One can very easily associate with Kr  a simply by
remembering His transcendental pastimes. Everyone has a tendency to
love someone. That Kr  a should be the object of love is the central point
of Krwa consciousness. By constantly chanting the Hare Kr  a mantra
and remembering the transcendental pastimes of Kr  a, one can be fully
in Kr !la consciousness and thus make his life sublime and fruitful.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-fourth Chapter of
Kr  a, "The Gopis ' Feelings of Separation. "
35 I Kamsa Sends Al(riira for Krsna• • •
Vrndavana was always absorbed in the thought of Kf J)a. Everyone
remembered His pastimes and was constantly merged in the ocean of
transcendental bliss. But the material world is so contaminated that even
in v rndavana the as u ras or demons tried to disturb the peaceful situation.
One demon named Ari tasura entered the village like a great bull with a
gigantic body and horns, digging up the earth with his hoofs. When the
demon entered v rndavana, it appeared that the whole land trembled, as if
there were an earthquake. He roared fiercely, and after digging up the earth
on the riverside , he entered the village proper. The fearful roaring of the
bull was so piercing that some of the pregnant cows and women had
miscarriages. Its body was so big, stout and strong that a cloud hovered
over its body just as clouds hover over mountains. Ari tasura entered
Vrndavana with such a fearful appearance that just on seeing this great
demon, all the men and women were afflicted with great fear, and the cows
and other animals fled the village.
The situation became very terrible, and all the inhabitants of V rndavana
began to cry, " Kr J)a ! Kf J)a, please save us ! " Kr !la also saw that the cows
were running away, and He immediately replied, " D on't be afraid. D on't
be afraid." He then appeared before Ari tasura and said, " You are the
lowest of living entities. Why are you frightening the inhabitants of
G okula? What will you gain by this action? If you have come to challenge
My authority, then I am prepared to fight you . " In this way, Kr !la
challenged the demon, and the demon became very angry by the words of
Kr J)a. Kr !la stood before the bull, resting His hand on the shoulder of a
friend. The bull began to proceed towards Krwa in anger. Digging the
earth with his hoofs, Ari tasura lifted his tail, and it appeared that clouds
were hovering about the tail. His eyes were reddish and moving in anger .
Pointing his horns at Kr J)a, he began to charge Him , just like the thunder-
236
Kamsa Sends Akriira for Kr J).a 237
bolt of lndra. But Kr  a immediately caught his horns and tossed him
away, just as a gigantic elephant repels a small inimical elephant. Although
the demon appeared to be very tired and although he was perspiring, he
took courage and got up. Again he charged Kr  a with great force and
anger. While rushing towards Kr  a, he breathed very heavily. Kr  a again
caught his horns and immediately threw him on the ground, breaking his
horns . Kr  a then began to kick his body, just as one squeezes a wet cloth
on the ground. Being thus kicked by Kr  a, Ari tasura rolled over and
began to move his legs violently. Bleeding and passing stool and urine, his
eyes starting from their sockets, he passed to the kingdom of death.
The demigods in the celestial planets began to shower flowers on Kr  a
for His wonderful achievements. Kr  a was already the life and soul of the
inhabitants of v rndavana, and after killing this demon in the shape of a
bull, He became the cynosure of all eyes. With Balarama, He triumphantly
entered V rndavana village, and the inhabitants glorified Him and Balarama
with great jubilation. When a person performs some wonderful feat, his
kinsmen and relatives and friends naturally become jubilant.
It was after this incident that the great sage N arada disclosed the secret
of Kr  a. Narada Muni is generally known as devadarsana, which means
that he can be seen only by demigods or persons on the same level with
the demigods. But N arada visited Kamsa, who was not at all on the level
of the demigods , and yet Kamsa saw him . Of course Kamsa also saw Kr  a,
what to speak of N arada Muni, but generally one must have purified eyes
to see the Lord and His devotees. Of course, by association with a pure
devotee, one can derive an imperceptible benefit, which is called
ajnatasukrti. He cannot understand how he is making progress, yet he
makes progress by seeing the devotee of the Lord. N arada Muni's mission
was to finish things quickly. Kr  a appeared to kill the demons, and Kamsa
was the chief among them. N arada wanted to expedite things ; therefore, he
immediately approached Kamsa with all the real information. "You are to
be killed by the eighth son of V asudeva," N arada told Kamsa. "That eighth
son is Kr  a. You were misled by V asudeva into believing that the eighth
issue of V asudeva was a daughter. Actually, the daughter was born of
Y asoda, the wife of N anda Maharaja, and V asudeva exchanged the
daughter, so you were misled. Kr  a is the son of V asudeva, as is Balarama.
Being afraid of your atrocious nature, V asudeva has tactfully hidden Them
in V rndavana, out of your sight. " ' N arada further informed Kamsa, " Kr  a
and Balarama have been living incognito in the care of N anda Maharaja. All
the asuras, your companions who were sent to V rndavana to kill different
children, were all killed by Kr  a and Balarama. "
238 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
As soon as Kamsa got this information from Narada Muni, he took out
his sharpened sword and prepared to kill Vasudeva for his duplicity. But
Narada pacified him. "You are not to be killed by Vasudeva,'' he said.
"Why are you so anxious to kill him? Better try to kill Krwa and
Balarama." But in order to satisfy his wrath, Kamsa arrested Vasudeva and
his wife and shackled them in iron chains. Acting on the new information,
Kamsa immediately called for the Kesi demon and asked him to go to
V rndavana immediately to fetch Balarama and Kr va. In actuality, Karns a
asked Kesi to go to V rndavana to be killed by Kr va and Balarama and
thus get salvation. Then . Kamsa called for the expert elephant trainers,
Ca!liira, MuHika, Sala, Tosala, etc., and he told them, "My dear friends, try
to hear me attentively. At Nanda Maharaja's place in Vrndavana there are
two brothers, Kr va and Balarama. They are actually two sons of Vasudeva.
As you know, I have been destined to be killed by Kr va ; there is a
prophecy to this effect. Now I am requesting you to arrange for a wrestling
match. People from different parts of the country will come to see the
festival. I will arrange to get those two boys here, and you will try to kill
Them in the wrestling arena."
Wrestling matches are still enjoyed by the indigenous people in the
northern part of India, and it appears from the statements of Srimad
Bhiigavatam that 5,000 years ago wrestling was popular. Kamsa planned
to arrange such a wrestling competition and to invite people to visit. He
also told the trainers of the elephants, "Be sure to bring the elephant
named Kuvalayap19a and keep him at the gate of the wrestling camp. Try
to capture Kr va and Balarama on Their arrival and kill Them."
' Kamsa also advised his friends to arrange to worship Lord Siva by
offering animal sacrifices and performing the sacrifice called Dhanur-yajiia
and the sacrifice performed on the fourteenth day of the moon known as
Caturdasi. This date falls three days after Ekadasi, and it is set aside for
the worship of Lord Siva. One of the plenary portions of Lord Siva is
called Kalabhairava. This form of Lord Siva is worshiped by the demons
who offer skinned animals before him. The process is .still current in India
in a place called V aidyanatha-dhama where the demons offer animal sacri
fices to the deity of Kalabhairava. Kamsa belonged to this demonic group.
He was also an expert diplomat, and so he quickly arranged for his demon
friends to kill Kr va and Balarama.
He then called for Akriira, one of the descendants in the family of
Y adu in which Kr va was born as the son of V asudeva. When Akriira came
to see Kamsa, Kamsa very politely shook hands with him and said, "'My
dear Akriira, actually I've no better friend than you in the Bhoja and Y adu
Kamsa Sends Alm1ra for Kr J.la 239
dynasties. You are the most munificent person, so as a friend I am begging
charity from you. Actually I have taken shelter of you exactly as King
Indra takes shelter of Lord Vi  m. I request you to go immediately to
V rndavana and find the two boys named Krwa and Balarama. They are
sons of Nanda Maharaja. Take this nice chariot, especially prepared for the
boys, and bring Them here immediately. That is my request to you. Now,
my plan is to kill these two boys. As soon as They come in the gate, there
will be a giant elephant named Kuvalayap19a awaiting, and possibly he will
be able to kill Them. But if somehow or other They escape, They will
next meet the wrestlers and will be killed by them. That is my plan. And
after killing these two boys, I shall kill Vasudeva and N anda, who are
supporters of the Vr  i and Bhoja dynasties. I shall also kill my father
Ugrasena and his brother D evaka, because they are actually my enemies
and are hindrances to my diplomacy and politics. Thus I shall get rid of all
my enemies. Jarasandha is my father-in-law, and I have a great monkey
friend named Dvivida. With their help it will be easy to kill all the kings on
the surface of the world who support the demigods. This is my plan. In this
way I shall be free from all opposition, and it will b e very pleasant to rule
the world without obstruction. You may know also that Sambara,
Narakasura and Ba asura are my intimate friends, and when I begin this
war against the kings who support the demigods, they will help me
considerably. Surely I shall be rid of all my enemies. Please go immediately
to V rndavana and encourage the boys to come here to see the beauty of
Mathura and take pleasure in the wrestling competition."
After hearing this plan of Kamsa's, Akriira replied, "My dear King, your
plan is very excellently made to counteract the hindrances to your diplo
matic activities. But you should maintain some discretion, o r your plans
will not be fruitful. After all, man proposes, God disposes. We may make
very great plans, but unless they are sanctioned by the supreme authority,
they will fail. Everyone in this material world knows that the supernatural
power is the ultimate disposer of everything. One may make a very great
plan with his fertile brain, but he must know that he will become subjected
to the fruits, misery and happiness. But I have nothing to say against your
proposal. As a friend, I shall carry out your order and bring Kr !la and
Balarama here, as you desire."
After instructing his friends in various ways, Kamsa retired, and Akriira
went to v rndavana.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-fifth Chapter of
Krwa, "Kamsa Sends A k rilra for Kr§[!-a. "
36 I Killing the Kesi Demon
and V yomasura
After being instructed by Kamsa, the demon Ke8i assumed the form of
a terrible horse. He entered the area of V rndavana, his great mane flying
and his hooves digging up the earth. He began to whinny and terrify the
whole world. Kr pa saw that the demon was terrifying all the residents of
V rndavana with his whinnying and his tail wheeling in the sky like a big
cloud. Kr !la could understand that the horse was challenging Him to
fight. The Lord accepted his challenge and stood before the Ke8i demon.
As He called him t o fight, the horse began to proceed towards Kr pa,
making a horrible sound like a roaring lion. Kesi rushed toward the Lord
with great speed and tried to trample Him with his legs, which were
strong, forceful, and as hard as stone. Kr !•a, however, immediately caught
hold .of his legs and thus baffled him. Being somewhat angry, Kr pa began
to move around the horse dextrously. After a few rounds, He threw him a
hundred yards away, just as Garu9a throws a big snake. Thrown by Kr pa,
the horse immediately passed out, but after a little while he regained
consciousness and with great anger and force rushed toward Kr pa again,
this time with his mouth open. As soon as Kesi reached Him, Kr !•a pushed
His left hand within the horse's mouth. The horse felt great pain because
the hand of Kr pa felt to him like a hot iron rod. Im ediately his teeth
fell out. Kr pa's hand within the mouth of the horse at once began to
inflate, and Ke8i's throat choked up . As the great horse began to suffocate,
perspiration appeared on his body, and he began to throw his legs hither
and thither. As his last breath came, his eyeballs bulged in their sockets, and
he passed stool and urine simultaneously. Thus the vital force of his life ex
pired. When the horse was dead, his mouth became loose and Kr pa could
extract His hand without difficulty. He did not feel any surprise that the
Kesi demon was killed so easily, but the demigods were amazed, and out of
their great appreciation they offered Kr pa greetings by showering flowers. -
240
Killing the Kesi Demon and Vyomasura 241
After this incident, Narada Muni, the greatest of all devotees, came to
see Kr 9a in a solitary place and began to talk with Him. "My dear Lord
Kr 9a," he said, "You are the unlimited Supersoul, the supreme controller
of all mystic p owers, the Lord of the whole universe, the all-pervading
Personality of Godhead. You are the resting place of the cosmic manifesta
tion, the master of all the devotees and the Lord of everyone. My dear
Lord, as the Supersoul of all living entities, You remain concealed within
their hearts exactly as fire remains concealed in every piec  of fuel. You
are the witness of all the activities of the living entities, and You are the
supreme controller within their hearts. You are self-sufficient ; before
the creation, you existed, and by Your energy You have created the whole
material universe. According to Your perfect plan, this material world is
created by the interaction of the modes of nature, and by You they are
maintained and annihilated. Although You are unaffected by all these
activities, You are the supreme controller eternally. My dear Lord, You
have advented Yourself on the surface of this world j ust to kill all the
so-called kings who are actually demons. These hobgoblins are cheating
people in the dress of the princely order. You have advented Yourself to
fulfill Your own statement that You come within this material world just
to protect the principles of religion and annihilate unwanted miscreants.
My dear Lord, I am therefore sure that the day after tomorrow I shall see
demons like Ca ii.ra, Mu tika and the other wrestlers and elephants, as
well as Kamsa himself, killed by You. And I shall see this with my own
· eyes. After this, I hope I shall be able to see the killing of other demons
like Sankha, Y avana, Mura, and N arakasura. I shall also see how You take
away the piirijiita flower from the kingdom of heaven, and how You defeat
the king of heaven himself.
"My dear Lord," Narada Muni continued, "I shall then be able to see
how You marry princesses, the daughters of chivalrous kings, by paying
the price of\ k§atriya strength." (Whenever a k§atriya wants to marry a
very beautiful and qualified princess of a great king, he must fight his
competitors and emerge victorious. Then he is given the hand of the
princess in charity.)
"I shall also see how You save King N rga from a hellish condition,"
said N arada Muni. "This You shall enact in D varaka. I shall also be able to
see how You get Your wife and the Syamantaka jewel and how You save
the son of a b riihmarw from death after he has already been transferred
to another planet. After this, I will be able to see You kill the Pau9 raka
demon and burn to ashes the kingdom of Kasi. I will see how You kill the
King of Cedi and Dantavakra in great fights, on behalf of Maharaja
242 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Yudh !hira. Besides all this, it will be possible for me to see many other
chivalrous activities while You remain in D varaka. And all these activities
performed by Your grace will be sung by great poets for all time. And at
the battle of Kuruk etra You will take part as the chariot driver of Your
friend Arjuna, and as the invincible death incarnation, eternal time, You
will vanquish all belligerents assembled there. I shall see a large number of
military forces killed in that battlefield. My Lord, let me offer my respect
ful obeisances unto Your lotus feet. You are situated completely in the
transcendental position in perfect knowledge and bliss. You are complete
in Yourself and are beyond all desires. By exhibiting Y our internal potency,
You have set up the influence of miiyii. Your unlimited potency cannot
even be measured by anyone. My dear Lord, You are the supreme con
troller. You are under Your own internal potency, and it is simply vain to
think that You are dependent on any of Your creations.
"You have taken birth in the Yadu dynasty, or the Vf l).i dynasty. Your
advent on the surface of the earth in Your original form of eternal blissful
knowledge is Your own pastime. You are not dependent on anything but
Yourself; therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto Your lotus feet."
Narada Muni wanted to impress upon people in general that Kr pa is
fully independent. His activities, such as His appearance in the family of
Y adu or His friendship with Arjuna, do not necessarily oblige Him to act
to enjoy their results. They are all pastimes, and for Him they are all play.
But for us they are actual, tangible facts.
After offering his respectful obeisances to Lord Krwa, Narada Muni took
permission and left. After He had killed the Ke.Si demon, Kr pa returned
to tending the cows with His friends in the forest as though nothing had
happened. Thus Kr tta is eternally engaged in His transcendental activities
in Vrndavana with His friends, the cowherd boys and gopis, but sometimes
He exhibits the extraordinary prowess of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead by killing different types of demons.
Later that morning Knl).a went to play with His cowherd boy friends
on the top of the Govardhana Hill. They were imitating the -play of
thieves and police. Some of the boys became police constables, and some
became thieves, and some took the role of lambs. While they were thus
enjoying their childhood pastimes, a demon known by the name of
V yomasura, "the demon who flies in the sky," appeared on the scene. He
was the son of another great demon named Maya. These demons can
perform wonderful magic. Vyomasura took the part -of a cowherd boy
playing as thief and stole many boys who" were playing the parts of lambs.
One after another he took away almost all the boys and put them in the
Killing the Kesi Demon and Vyomasura 243
caves of the mountain and sealed the mouths of the caves with stones.
Kf a could understand the trick the demon was playing; therefore He
caught hold of him exactly as a lion catches hold of a lamb. The demon
tried to expand himself like a hill to escape arrest, but Krwa did not allow
him to get out of His clutches. He was immediately thrown on the _ground
with great force and killed, just as an. animal is killed in the slaughter
house. After killing the Vyoma demon, Lord Kr .p.a released all His
friends from the caves of the mountain. · He was then praised by His
friends and by the demigods for these wonderful acts. He again returned
to V rndavana with His cows and friends.
Thus ends the Bhak tivedanta purport of the Thirty-sixth Chapter of
KP} a, ' Killing the Kesi Demon and Vyomiisura. "
37 I Akriira's Arrival in Vrndavana•
Narada Muni did not mention Kr l).a's killing Vyomasura, which means
that he was killed on the same day as the Kesi demon. The Ke81 demon
was killed in the early morning, and after that the boys went to tend the
cows on Govardhana Hill, and it was there that Vyomasura was killed.
Both demons were killed in the morning. Akriira was requested by Kamsa
to arrive in V rndavana by evening. After receiving instruction from Kamsa,
Akriira started the next morning via chariot for V rndavana. Because
Akriira himself was a great devotee of the Lord, while going to V rndavana
he began to praise the Lord. D evotees are always absorbed in thoughts of
Kr l).a, and Akriira was constantly thinking of Lord Kr l).a's lotus eyes.
He did not know what sort of pious activities he must have done to
gain an opportunity to go see Lord Kr J).a. Akriira thought that if Kr l).a
willed , he would be able to see Him . Akriira considered himself most
fortunate that he was going to see Kr l).a, whom great mystic yogis desire
to see. He was confident that on that day all the sinful reactions of his
past life would be finished and his fortunate human form of life would be
successful. Akriira also considered that he was very much favored by
Kamsa, who was sending him to bring back Kr l).a and Balarama and thus
enabling him to see the Lord. Akriira continued to consider that formerly
great sages and saintly persons were liberated from the material world
simply by seeing the shining nails of the lotus feet of Kr J).a.
"That Supreme Personality of Godhead has now come j ust like an
ordinary human being, and it is my great fortune to be able to see Him face
to face, " Akriira thought. H e was thrilled with expectations of seeing the
very lotus feet which are worshiped by great demigods like· Brahma,
Narada, and Lord Siva, which traverse the ground of V rndavana and which
touch the breasts of the gopis covered with tinges of kunkuma. He thought,
"I am so f?rtunate that I will be able to see those very lotus feet on this
244
Akrura's Arrival in Vrndavana  .
245
day, and certainly I shall be able to see the beautiful face of Krwa, which
is marked on the forehead and the nose with tilaka. And I shall also see
His smile and His curling black hair. I can be sure of this opportunity
because I see that today the deer are passing on my right side. Today it
will be possible for me to actually see the beauty of the spiritual kingdom
of Vi  uloka because Krwa is the Supreme Viwu, and He has advented
Himself out of His own good will. He is the reservoir of all beauty;
therefore my eyes will be filled today."
Akriira knew beyond doubt that Lord Kr  a is the Supreme Vi  u.
Lord V iwu glances over the material energy, and thus the cosmic mani
festation comes into being. And although Lord Vi  u is the creator of
this material world, He is free, by His own energy, from the influence of
material energy. By His internal potency He can pierce the darkness of
material energy. Similarly, Krwa the original Viwu, by expansion of His
internal potency, created the inhabitants of V rndavana. In the Brahma
samhitii it is also confirmed that the paraphernalia and the abode of Krwa
are expansions of His internal potency. The same internal potency is
exhibited on earth as Vrndavana, where Kr  a enjoys Himself with His
parents and in the company of His friends, the cowherd boys and gopis.
By the statement of Akriira, it is clear that, since Krwa is transcendental
to the modes of material nature, the inhabitants of Vrndavana, who are
engaged in loving service of the Lord, are also transcendental.
Akriira also considered the necessity of the transcendental pastimes of
the Lord. He thought that the transcendental activities, instructions,
qualities and pastimes of Krwa are all for the good fortune of people in
general. The people can remain constantly in Krwa consciousness by
discussing the Lord's transcendental form, qualities, pastimes, and para
phernalia. By doing so, the whole universe can actually live auspiciously
and advance peacefully. But without Kr  a consciousness, civilization is
but a decoration for a dead body. A dead body may be decorated very
nicely, but without consciousness such decorations are useless. Human
society without Krwa consciousness is useless and lifeless.
Akriira thought, "That Supreme Personality of Godhead, Krwa, has
now appeared as one of the descendants of the Y adu dynasty. The princi
ples of religion are His enacted laws. Those who are abiding by such laws
are the demigods, and those who are not abiding are demons. He has
advented Himself to give protection to the demigods, who are very obedient
to the laws of the Supreme Lord. The demigods and the devotees of the
Lord take pleasure in abiding by the laws of Kr  a, and Krwa takes
pleasure in giving them all sorts of protection. These activities of Krwa,
246 Kr J}a, the S upreme Personality of Godhead
His protection of the devotees and killing the demons, as confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gita, are always good for men to hear and narrate. The glorious
activities of the Lord will ever increasingly be chanted by the devotees
and demigods.
"Kr J}a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the spiritual master of
all spiritual masters ; He is the deliverer of all fallen souls and the proprietor
of the three worlds. Anyone is able to see Him by eyes smeared with love
of Godhead. Today I shall be able to see the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who by His transcendental beauty has attracted the goddess of
fortune to live with Him perpetually. As soon as I arrive in Vrndavana, I
will get down from this cl;1.ariot and fall prostrate to offer my obeisances
to the Supreme Lord, thecmaster of material nature and all living entities.
The lotus feet of Kr  a are always worshiped by great mystic yogis, so I
shall also worship His lotus feet and become one of His friends in
V rndavana like the cowherd boys. When I bow down before Lord Kr l!a
in that way, certainly He will place His fearless lotus hand on my head.
His hand is offered to all conditioned souls who take shelter under His
lotus feet. Kr  a is the ultimate goal of life for all people who fear material
existence , and certainly when I see Him He will give me the shelter of His
lotus feet, I am aspiring for the touch of His lotus-like hands on my head."
In this way Akriira expected blessings from the hand of Kr l!a. He knew
that Indra, who is the king of heaven and the master of the three worlds
the upper, middle, and lower planetary systems-was blessed by the Lord
simply for his offering a little water which Kr l!a accepted. Similarly, Bali
Maharaja gave only three feet of land in charity to Vamanadeva, and he
also offered a little water which Lord Vamanadeva accepted, and thereby
Bali Maharaja attained the position of Indra. When the gopis were dancing
with Kr l!a in the rasa dance, they became fatigued, and Kr l!a smeared His
hand, which is as fragrant as a lotus flower, over the pearl-like drops of
perspiration on the faces of the gopis, and immediately they became
refreshed. Thus Akriira was expecting benediction from that supreme hand
of Kr l!a. Kr l!a's hand is capable of bestowing benediction to all kinds of
men if they take to Kr l!a consciousness. If one wants material happiness
like the king of heaven, he can derive that benediction from the hand of
Kr l}a; if one wants liberation from the pangs of material existence, he can
also get benediction from the hand of Kr l}a ; and if one in pure transcen
dental love for Krwa wants personal association and the touch of His
transcendental body, he can also gain benediction from His hand.
Akriira was afraid, however, of being deputed by Kamsa, the enemy of
Kr J}a. He thought, "I am going to see Krwa as a messenger of the enemy."
Akriira's Arrival in V rndavana 247.
And at the same time, he thought, " Kr  a is in each and everyone's heart
as the Supersoul, so He must know my heart." Although Akrura was
trusted by the enemy of Kr  a, his heart was clear. He was a pure devotee
of Kr  a. He risked Kamsa's wrath just to meet Kr  ta. He was certain that
although he was going as a representative of Kamsa, Kr  a would not
accept him as an enemy. "Even though I am on a sinful mission, being
deputed by Kamsa, when I approach the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
I shall stand before Him with all humility and folded hands. Surely, He will
be pleased with my devotional attitude, and maybe He will smile lovingly
and look upon me and thereby free me from all kinds of sinful reaction. I
shall then be on the platform of transcendental bliss and knowledge. Since
Kr  a knows my heart, certainly when I approach Him, He will embrace
me. I am not only one of the members of the Y adu dynasty, but I am an
unalloyed pure devotee. By His merciful embrace, my body, my heart and
soul will be completely cleansed of the actions and reactions of my past
life. When our bodies touch, I will immediately stand up with folded
hands, with all humility. Certainly Kr  a and Balarama will call me,
'Akrura, uncle,' and at that time my whole life will be glorious. Unless
one is recognized by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, his life cannot
be successful."
It is clearly stated here that one should try to be recognized by the
Supreme Personality of Godhead by one's service and devotion, without
which the human form of life is condemned. As stated in the Bhagavad
gita, the Supreme Lord, Personality of Godhead, is equal to everyone. He
has no friends and no enemies. But He is inclined to a devotee who renders
Him service with devotional love. The Bhagavad-gita also declares that the
Supreme Lord is responsive to the devotional service rendered by the
devotee. Akrura thought that Kr  a was like the desire tree in the heavenly
planets which gives fruit according to the desire of the worshiper. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is also the source of everything. A
devotee must know how to render service unto Him and thus be recognized
by Him. In the Caitanya-caritamrta it is therefore explained that one
should serve both the spiritual master and Kr  a simultaneously and in ·
that way make progress in Kr  a consciousness. Service rendered to Kr  a
under the direction of the spiritual master is bona fide service because the
spiritual master is the manifested representative of Kr  a. Sri Visvanatha
Cakravarti 'fhakur says that when one satisfies the spiritual master, he
satisfies the Supreme Lord. It is exactly like service in a government office.
One has to work under the supervision of the departmental head. If the
supervisor of the department is satisfied with the service of a particular
248 KH a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
person, a promotion and increase in pay will automatically come.
Akriira then thought, "When Kf l}a and Balarama are pleased with my
prayers, certainly They will take my hand, receive me within Their homes
and offe  me all kinds of respectable hospitalities, and They will surely ask
me of the activities of Kamsa and his friends."
In this way, Akriira, who was the son of Svaphalka, meditated on Sri
Kr l}a on his journey from Mathura. He reached Vrndavana by the end of
the day. Akriira passed the whole journey without knowing how long it
took. When he reached V rndavana, the sun was setting. As soon as he
entered the boundary of Vrndavana, he saw the footprints of the cows and
Lord Kr l}a's footprints, impressed with the signs of His sole, the flag,
trident, thunderbolt and lotus flower. Upon seeing the footprints of
Kr J}a, Akriira immediately jumped down from the chariot, out of respect.
He became overwhelmed with all the symptoms of ecstasy ; he wept, and
his body trembled. Out of extreme jubilation upon seeing the dust touched
by the lotus feet of Kf J}a, Akriira fell flat on his face and began to roll on
the ground.
Akriira's j ourney to Vrndavana is exemplary./One who intends to visit
Vrndavana should follow the ideal footsteps of Akriira and always think
of the pastimes and activities of the Lord. As soon as one reaches the
boundary of v rndavana, he should immediately smear the dust of
Vrndavana over his body without thinking of his material position and
prestige. N arottamadasa 'fhakur has sung in his celebrated song, V4aya
chiiriyii kave suddha have mana: "When my mind will be purified after
leaving the contamination of material sense enjoyment, I shall be able to
visit Vrndavana. " Actually, one cannot go to Vrndavana by r.urchasing a
ticket. The process of going to V rndavana is shown by Akrura.
When Akriira entered V rndavana, he saw Kf l}a and Balarama engaged
in supervising the milking of the cows. Kr l}a was dressed in yellow
garments and Balarama in bluish. Akriira also saw that Kr l}a's eyes were
exactly like the beautifully grown lotus flower of the autumn season. He
saw both Kr l}a and Balarama in the spring of Their youth. Although both
were similar in bodily features, Kf l}a was blackish in complexion, whereas
Balarama was whitish. Both were the shelter of the goddess of fortune.
They had well-constructed bodies, beautiful hands and pleasing faces, and
They were as strong as elephants. Now, after seeing Their footprints,
Akriira actually saw Kr l}a and Balarama, face to face. Although They
were the most influential personalities, They were glancing at him with
smiling faces. Akriira could understand that both Kr l}a and Balarama had
returned from tending cows in the forest; They had taken Their baths and
Akriira's Arrival in Vrndavana 249
were dressed with fresh clothing and garlanded with flowers and necklaces
made of valuable jewels. Their bodies were smeared with the pulp of
sandalwood. Akrura greatly appreciated the aroma of flowers and sandal
wood and Their bodily presence. He considered himself very fortunate to
see Kp;; a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His plenary expansion,
Balarama, face to face, for he knew that They were the original personali
ties of the creation.
As stated in the Brahma-sarhhitii, Kr  a is the original Personality of
Godhead and the cause of all causes. Akriira could understand that the
Supreme Personality of Godhead appeared personally for the welfare of
His creation, to reestablish the principles of religion and to annihilate the
demons. With Their bodily effulgence, the brothers were dissipating all the
darkness of the world, as if They were mountains of sapphire and silver.
Without hesitating, Akriira immediately got down from his chariot and fell
flat, just like a rod, before Kr  a and Balarama. Upon touching the lotus
feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he became overwhelmed with
transcendental bliss ; his voice choked up and he could not speak. Due to
Kr  a's transcendental presence, incessant torrents of tears fell from his
eyes. He remained stunned in ecstasy , as if devoid of all powers to see and
speak. Lord Kr  a, who is very kind to His devotees, raised Akriira with
His hand and embraced him. It appeared that Lord Kr  a was very pleased
with Akrura. Balarama also embraced Akrura. Taking him by the hand,
Kr  a and Balarama brought him to Their sitting room where They offered
him a very nice sitting place and water for washing his feet. They also
worshiped him with suitable presentations of honey and other ingredients.
When Akrura was thus comfortably seated, both Kr t;J.a and Balarama
offered Him a cow in charity and then brought very palatable dishes of
eatables, and Akrura accepted them. When Akrura finished eating, Bala
rama gave him betel nut and spices, as well as pulp of sandalwood, just to
make him more pleased and comfortable. The Vedic system of receiving a
guest was completely observed by Lord Krwa Himself to teach all others
how to receive a guest at home. It is a Vedic injunction that even if a guest
is an enemy, he should be received so well that he does not apprehend any
danger from the host. If the host is a poor man, he should at least offer a
straw mat as a sitting place and a glass of water to drink. Kn a and Bala
rama welcomed Akrura just befitting his exalted position.
After Akrura was thus properly received and seated, Nanda Maharaja,
the foster father of Kr  a, said, "My dear Akriira, what shall I inquire
from you? I know that you are being protected by Kamsa, who is most
cruel and demoniac. His protection is just like the slaughterhouse
250 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
keeper's protection of animals he will kill in the future. Kamsa is so
selfish that he has killed the sons of his own sister, so how can I honestly
believe that he is protecting the citizens of Mathura?" This statement
is most significant. If the political or executive heads of the state are
simply interested in themselves, they can never look after the welfare of
the citizens.
As N anda Maharaja spoke to Akrura with pleasing words, Akrura forgot
all the fatigue of his day's journey from Mathura to V rndavana.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-seventh Chapter of
Kr IJ-a, "Akrnra 's A rrival in Vrndiivana. "
38 I Akriira's Return J ourney and His Visiting
of Visnuloka Within the Yamuna River• •
Akrilra was warmly received by Lord Kr pa and Nanda Maharaj a and
offered a resting place for the night. In the meantime , the two brothers
Balarama and Kr pa went to take Their supper. Akrilra sat on his bed and
began to reflect that all the desires which he had anticipated while coming
from Mathura to V rndavana had been fulfilled. Lord Krsna is the husband. . . . .
of the goddess of fortune ; being pleased with His pure devotee , He can
offer whatever the devotee desires. But the pure devotee does not · ask
anything from the Lord for his personal benefit.
After taking Th.eir supper, Kr pa and Balarama came to bid goodnight
to Akrilra. Kr pa asked about His maternal uncle , Kamsa, " How is he
dealing with his friends? " And He asked , " How are my relatives? " He also
inquired into Kamsa 's plans. The Supreme Personality of Godhead then
informed Akrilra that his presence was very much welcome. He inquired
from him whether all his relatives and friends were well and free from all
kinds of ailments. K[wa stated that He was very sorry that His maternal
uncle Kamsa was the head of the kingdom ; He said that Kamsa was the
greatest anachronism in the whole system of government and that they
could not expect any welfare for the citizens while he ruled. Then Kr pa
said, " My father has undergone much tribulation simply from My being
his son. For this reason also he has lost many other sons. I think
Myself so fortunate that you have come as My friend and relative. My good
friend Akrilra, please tell me the purpose of your coming to V rndavana. "
After this inquiry, Akrilra, who belonged to the dynasty o f Yadu ,
explained the recent events i n Mathura, inclu ding Kamsa's attempt to kill
V asudeva, the father of Kr pa. He related the things which happened after
the disclosure by N arada that Krwa was the son of V asudeva. Sitting by
Him in the house of N anda Maharaja, Akrii.ra narrated all the stories
regarding Kamsa. He told how N arada met Kamsa and how he himself was
deputed by Kamsa to come to V rndavana. Akrilra explained to Kr pa that
25 1
252 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Narada had told Kamsa all about Kr rta's being transferred from Mathura
to V rndavana just after His birth and about His killing all the demons sent
by Kamsa. Akrura then explained to Kr rta the purpose of his coming to
V rndavana: to take him back to Mathura. After hearing of these arrange
ments, Balarama and Kr rta, who are very expert in killing opponents,
mildly laughed at the plans of Kamsa.
They asked Nanda Maharaja to invite all the cowherd boys to go to
Mathura to participate in the ceremony known as Dhanur-yajiia. Kamsa
wanted them all to go there to participate in the function. On Kr  a's
word, N anda Maharaja at once called for the cowherd boys and asked
them to collect all kinds of milk preparations and milk to present in the
ceremony. He also sent instructions to the police chief of V rndavana to
tell all the inhabitants about Kamsa's great Dhanur-yajfia function and
invite them to join. Nanda Maharaja informed the cowherd boys that they
would start the next morning. They therefore arranged for the cows and
bulls to carry them all to Mathura.
When the gopis saw that Akrura had come to take Kr va and Balarama
away to Mathura, they became overwhelmed with anxiety. Some of them
became so aggrieved that their faces turned black, and they began to
breathe warmly and had palpitations of the heart. They discovered that
their hair and dress immediately loosened. Hearing the news that Kr rta
and Balarama were leaving for Mathura, others who were engaged in
household duties stopped working as if they had forgotten everything, like
a person who is called forth to die and leave this world at once. Others
immediately fainted due to separation from Kr rta. Remembering His
attractive smile and His talks with them, the gopis became overwhelmed
with grief. They all remembered the characteristics of the Personality of
Godhead, how He moved within the area of Vrndavana and how, with
joking words, He attracted all their hearts. Thinking of Kr  a and of their
imminent separation from Him, the gopis assembled together with heavy
beating hearts. Completely absorbed in thought of Kr  a, tears fell from
their eyes. They began to converse as follows.
"0 Providence, you are so cruel! It appears that you do not know how
to show mercy to others. By your arrangement, friends contact one
another, but without fulfilling their desires you separate them. This is
exactly like children's play that has no meaning. It is very abominable that
you arrange to show us beautiful K t;a, whose bluish curling hair beautifies
His broad forehead and sharp nose, who is always smiling to minimize all
contention in this material world, and then arrange to separate Him from
us. 0 Providence, You are so cruel! But most astonishingly You appear now
Akrftra s Return Journey 253
as ' Akrura,' which means 'not cruel.' In the beginning we appreciated Your
workmanship in giving us these eyes to see the beautiful face of Krwa, but
now, just like a foolish creature, You are trying to take out our eyes so we
may not see Krwa here again. Krwa, the son of Nanda Maharaja, is also
very cruel! He must always have new friends; He does not like to keep
friendship for a long time with anyone. We gopis of Vrndavana, having left
our homes, friends, and relatives, have become Krwa's maidservants, but
He is neglecting us and going away. He does not even look upon us,
although we are completely surrendered unto Him. Now all the young
girls in Mathura will have the opportunity. They are expecting Kr !!a's
arrival, and they will enjoy His sweet smiling face and will drink its honey.
Although we know that Kr !la is very steady and determined, we are
threatened that as soon as He sees the beautiful faces of the young girls in
l\1athura, He will forget Himself. We fear He will become controlled by
them and will forget us, for we are simple village girls. He will no longer be
kind to us. We therefore do not expect Krwa to return to Vrndavana.
He will not leave the company of the girls in Mathura."
The gopis began to imagine the great functions in the city of Mathura.
Kr r;a would pass through the streets, and the ladies and young girls of the
city would see Him from the balconies of their respective houses. Mathurii
City contained different communities, known then as Da5arha, Bhoja, An
dhaka and Satvata. All these communities were different branches of the
same family in which Kr !la appeared, namely the Y adu dynasty. They were
also expecting the arrival of Kr r;a. It had already been ascertained that
Kr r;a, who is the rest of the goddess of fortune and reservoir of all pleasure
and transcendental qualities, was going to visit Mathura City.
The gopis then began to condemn the activities of Akriira. They stated
that he was taking Kr r;a, who was more dear than the dearest to them and
who was the pleasure of their eyes. He was being taken from their sight
without their being informed or solaced by Akrura. Akriira should not
have been so merciless but should have taken compassion on them. The
gopis went on to say: "The most astonishing feature is that Krey a, the son
of N anda, without consideration, has already seated Himself on the chariot.
From this it appears that Kreyl).a is not very intelligent. Yet He may be very
intelligent-but He is not very civilized. Not only Krey!la, but all the cow
herd men are so callous that they are already yoking the bulls and calves
for the j ourney to Mathura. The elderly persons in V rndavana are also
merciless ; they do not take our plight into consideration and stop Kr !!a's
journey to Mathura. Even the demigods are very unkind to us; they are
not impeding His going to Mathura."
254 Kf J}a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
The gopis prayed to the demigods to create some natural disturbance,
such as a hurricane, storm or heavy rainfall, so that Kr JJa could not go to
Mathura. They then began to consider: "Despite our elderly parents and
guardians, we shall personally stop Kr JJa from going to Mathura. We have
no other alternative than to take this direct action. Everyone has gone
against us to take away Kr !Ja from our sight. Without Him we cannot live
for a moment." The gopis thus decided to obstruct the passage through
which the chariot of Kr  Ja was supposed to pass. They began to talk
among themselves: "We have passed a very long night-which seemed only
a moment-engaged in the riisa dance with Kr JJa. We were looking at His
sweet smile and were embracing and talking. Now, how shall we live even
for a moment if He goes away from us? At the end of the day, in the
evening, along with His elder brother Balarama, Krwa would return
home with Hib friends. His face would be smeared with the dust raised by
the hooves of the cows, and He would smile and play on His flute and
look upon us so kindly. How shall we be able to forget Him? How shall we
be able to forget Krwa, who is our life and soul? He has already taken away
our hearts in so many ways throughout our days and nights, and if He
goes away, there is no possibility of our continuing to live." Thinking like
this, the gopis became more and more griefstricken at Krwa's leaving
Vrndavana. They could not check their minds, and they began to cry
loudly, calling the different names of Kr JJa, "0 dear Damodara! Dear
Madhava! "
The gopis cried all night before the departure of Kr JJa. As soon as the
sun rose, Akrura finished his morning bath, got on the chariot and began
to start for Mathura with Kr  Ja and Balarama. Nanda Maharaja and the
cowherd men got up on bullock carts, after loading them with milk
preparations, such as yogurt, milk, and ghee, filled in big earthen pots,
and began to follow the chariot of Kr !Ja and Balarama. In spite of Kr  Ja's
asking them not to obstruct their way, all the gopis surrounded the chariot
and stood up to see Kr !Ja with pitiable eyes. Kr !Ja was very much af
fected upon seeing the plight of the gopis, but His duty was to start for
Mathura, for this was foretold by Narada. Kr JJa, therefore, consoled the
gopis. He told them that they should not be aggrieved; He was coming back
very soon after finishing His business. But they could not be persuaded to
disperse. The chariot, however, began to head west, and as it proceeded,
the minds of the gopis followed it as far as p ossible. They watched the flag
on the chariot as long as it was visible ; finally they could only see the dust
of the chariot in the distance. The gopis did not move from their places but
stood until the chariot could not be seen at all. They remained standing
Akriira's Return Journey 255
still, as if they were painted pictures. All the gopis decided that Kr pa was
not returning immediately, and with greatly disappointed hearts, they
returned to their respective homes. Being greatly disturbed by the absence
of Kr pa, they simply thought all day and night about His pastimes and
thus derived some consolation.
The Lord, accom-panied by Akrura and Balarama, drove the chariot with
great speed towards the bank of the Yamuna. Simply by taking a bath in
the Y am una, anyone can diminish the reaction of his sinful activities. Both
Krsna and Balarama took Their baths in the river and washed Their faces.
After drinking the transparent crystal clear water of the Yam una, They
took Their seats again on the chariot. The chariot was standing underneath
the shade of big trees, and both brothers sat down there. Akrura then took
Their permission to also take bath in the Yamuna. According to Vedic
ritual, after taking bath in the river, one should stand at least half·
submerged and murmur the Giiyatri mantra. While he was standing in the
river, Akrura suddenly saw both Balarama and Kr pa within the water. He
was surprised to see Them there because he was confident that They were
sitting on the chariot. Confused, he immediately came out of the water
and went to see where the boys were, and he was very surprised to see that
They were sitting on the chariot as before. When he saw Them on the
chariot, he began to wonder whether he saw Them in the water. He there
fore went back to the river. This time he saw not only Balarama and Kr pa
there, but many of the demigods and all the Siddhas, Carapas, and
Gandharvas. They were all standing before the Lord, who was lying down.
He also saw the Se a Naga with thousands of hoods. Lord Se a Naga was
covered with bluish garments, and His necks were all white. The white
necks of Se a Naga appeared exactly like snowcapped mountains. On the
curved lap of Se a Naga, Akrura saw Kr pa sitting very soberly, with four
hands. His eyes were like the reddish petals of the lotus flower.
In other words, after returning, Akrura saw Balarama turned into Se a
Naga and Kr pa turned into Maha· Vi pu. He saw the fourhanded Supreme
Personality of Godhead, smiliilg very beautifully. He was very pleasing to
all and was looking towards everyone. He appeared beautiful with His
raised nose, broad forehead, spread·up ears and reddish lips. His arms,
reaching to the knees, were very strongly built. His shoulders were high,
His chest very broad and shaped like the conchshell. His navel was very
deep, and His abdomen was marked with three lines. His waist was broad
and big, resembling the hips of a woman, and His thighs resembled the
trunks of elephants. The other parts of His legs, the joints and lower
extremities, were all very beautiful, the nails of His feet were dazzling,
256 KHJ)a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and His toes were as beautiful as the petals of the lotus flower. His helmet
was decorated with very valuable jewels. There was a nice belt around the
waist, and He wore a sacred thread across His broad chest. Bangles were on
His hands and armlets on the upper portion of His arms. He wore bells on
His ankles. He possessed dazzling beauty, and His palms were like the lotus
flower. He was still more beautiful with different emblems of the Vi  m
miirti, the conchshell, club, disc and lotus flower, which He held in His
four hands. His chest was marked with the particular signs of V i !m, and He
wore fresh flower garlands. All in all, He was very beautiful to look at.
Akriira also saw His Lordship surrounded by intimate associates like the
four Kumaras, Sanaka, Sanatana, Sananda and Sanatkumara, and other
associates like Sunanda and N anda, as well as demigods like Brahma and
Lord Siva. The nine great learned sages were there, and devotees like
Prahlada and Narada were engaged in offering prayers to the Lord with
clean hearts and pure words. After seeing the transcendental Personality of
Godhead, Akriira immediately became overwhelmed with great devotion,
and all over his body there was transcendental shivering. Although for the
moment he was bewildered, he retained his clear consciousness and bowed
down his head before the Lord. With folded hands and faltering voice, he
began to offer prayers to the Lord.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-eighth Chapter of
Kr r;ta, ''Akriira's Return I ourney and His Visiting of Vi§r-uloka Within the
Yamuna River. "
39/ Prayers by Akriira
Akriira offered his prayers as follows : "My dear Lord, I here pay my
respectful obeisances unto Y ou because You are the supreme cause of all
causes and the original inexhaustible Personality, N araya!la· From Y our
navel a lotus flower grows, and from that lotus, Brahma , the creator of this
universe , is born. Since Brahma is the cause of this universe, Y ou are the
cause of all causes. All the elements of this cosmic manifestation-earth,
water, fire , air , ether, ego and the total material energy, as well as nature,
the marginal energy, the living entities, mind, senses, the sense objects and
the demigods who control the affairs of the cosmos-are all produced from
Y our body. Y ou are the Supersoul of everything, but no one knows Your
transcendental form. Everyone within this material world is influenced by
the modes of material nature. D emigods like Lord Brahma, being covered
by the influence of material nature, do not exactly know Y our transcen
dental existence beyond the cosmic manifestation of the three modes of
material nature. Great sages and mystics worship You as the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the original cause of all living entities, all cosmic
manifestation and all demigods. They worship Y ou as all-inclusive. S ome
of the learned b riihmm;ws also worship Y ou by observing the ritualistic
ceremony of the .fig-veda. They offer different kinds of sacrifices in the
names of different gods. -And there are others also who are fond of wor
shiping transcendental knowledge. They are very peaceful and wish to give
up all kinds of material activities. They engage themselves in the philoso
phical search for You, known as jiiiina-yoga.
"There are devotees also known as Bhiigavatas who worship Y ou as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead . After being properly initiated in the
method of Piiiicariitra, they decorate their bodies with tilaka and engage in
worshiping Y our different forms of Vi !lu milrti. There are others also ,
known as S aivites , followers of the different iiciiryas , who worship Y ou in
the form of Lord Siva . "
257
258 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
It is stated in the Bhagavad-gi:ta that worship of demigods is also
indirectly worship of the Supreme Lord. But such worship is not orthodox,
because the worshipable Lord is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Naraya 1a. Demigods such as Brahma and Siva are incarnations of the
material qualities, which are also emanations from the body of Narayal)a.
Actually, there was no one existing before the creation except Narayal)a,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The worship of a demigod is not on
the level with worship of Naraya a.
Akrura said, "Although the minds of those who are devotees of the
demigods are fixed on a particular demigod, because You are the Supersoul
of all living entities, including the demigods, worship of demigods indirectly
goes to You. Sometimes, after flowing down from the mountains during
the rainy season, small rivers fail to reach the sea; some reach the sea and
some do not. Similarly, the worshipers of the demigods may or may not
reach You. There is no guarantee. Their success depends on the strength of
their worship. "
According to Vedic principle, when a worshiper worships a particular
demigod, he also conducts some ritual for Naraya a, Yajiidvara, for it is
mentioned in Bhagavad-gi:ta that demigods cannot fulfill the desires of
their worshipers without the sanction of Naraya a, or Kr !la. The exact
words used in the Bhagavad-gi:ta are mayaiva vihitan hi tan, which means
that the demigods can award some benediction after being authorized by
the Supreme Lord. When the demigod worshiper comes to his senses, he
can reason as follows: "The demigod can offer benediction only after being
empowered by the Supreme Lord, so why not worship the Supreme Lord
directly?" Worshipers of the demigods may come to the Supreme Per
sonality of Godhead, but others, who take the demigod as all in all, can
not reach the ultimate goal.
Akrura continued to pray: "My dear Lord, the whole world is filled
with the three material mode.s of nature, namely, goodness, passion and
ignorance. Everyone within this material world is covered by these modes,
from Lord Brahma down to the immovable plants and trees. My dear Lord,
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, because You are beyond the
influence of the three modes. Except for You, everyone is being carried
away by the waves of these modes. My dear Lord, fire is Your mouth, the
earth is Your feet, the sun is Your eye, the sky is Y our navel, and the
directions are Your ears. Space is Your head, the demigods are Your arms,
the oceans and seas are Your abdomen, and the winds and air are Your
strength and vitality. All the plants and herbs are the hair on Y our body;
the clouds are Your hair, the mountains are Your bones and nails, the days
and nights are the twinkling of Your eyelids; Prajapati (the progenitor) is
Prayers by Akrftra 259
Your genitals, and the rains are Your semina.
"My dear Lord, all living entities, including different grades of demigods,
different grades of overlords, kings and other living entities, are supposed
to be resting in You. As part and parcel of the big unit, one cannot know
You by experimental knowledge. One can simply understand Your tran
scendental existence as the great ocean in which different grades of living
entities are included, or as the fruit kadamba out of which small mosquitoes
come. My dear Lord, whatever eternal forms and incarnations Y ou accept
and which appear in this world are meant for relieving the living entities
from their ignorance, illusion and lamentation. All people, therefore, can
appreciate the incarnations and pastimes of Your Lordship and eternally
glorify Your activities. N o one can estimate how many forms and incar
nations You have, nor can anyone estimate the number of universes that
are existing within You.
"Let me therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto the incarnation
of fish, who appeared in devastation, although Your Lordship is the cause
of all causes. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto the Hayagriva
incarnation who killed the two demons, Madhu and Kaitabha ; let me offer
my respectful obeisances unto You who appeared as the gigantic tortoise
and held up the great mountain 1\landara, and who appeared as the boar
who rescued the earth planet which had fallen into the water of Garbho
daka. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto Your Lordship, who
appeared as N rsimhadeva, who delivered all kinds of devotees from the
fearful condition of atheistic atrocities. Let me offer my respectful obei
sances unto You who appeared as Vamanadeva and covered the three
worlds simply by expanding Your lotus feet. Let me offer my respect
ful obeisances unto You who appeared as the Lord of the Bhrgus in
order to kill all the infidel administrators of the world. And let me
offer my respectful obeisances unto You who appeared as Lord Rama
to kill demons like Rava a. You are worshiped by all devotees as the
chief of the Raghu dynasty, Lord Ramacandra. Let me offer my re
spectful obeisances unto You who appeared as Lord Vasudeva, Lord
Sankar a a, Lord Pradyumna and Lord Aniruddha. Let me offer my
respectful obeisances unto Y ou , who appeared as Lord Buddha in
order to bewilder the atheistic and demoniac. And let me offer my
respectful obeisances unto You, who appeared as Kalki in order to
chastise the so-called royal order degraded to the abominable condition
of the mlecchas, who are below the jurisdiction of Vedic regulative
principles.
"My dear Lord, everyone within this material world is conditioned by
Your illusory energy. Under the impression of false identification and false
260 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
possession, everyone is transmigrating from one body to another in the
path of fruitive activities and their reactions. My dear Lord, I am also no
exception to these conditioned souls. I am falsely thinking myself happy in
possessing my home, wife, children, state, property and effects. In this way
I am acting as if in a dreamland because none of these are permanent. I am
a fool to be always absorbed in such thoughts, accepting them as perma
nent and true. My dear Lord, due to my false identification, I have
accepted everything which is nonpermanent, such as this material body,
which is not spiritual and is the source of all kinds of miserable conditions.
Being bewildered by such concepts of life, I am always absorbed in
thoughts of duality, and I have forgotten You who are the reservoir of all
transcendental pleasure. I am bereft of Your transcendental association and
am just like a foolish creature who goes in search of water in the desert,
leaving the water spot which is covered by water-nourished vegetables. The
conditioned souls want to quench their thirst, but they do not know where
to find water. They give up the spot where there is actually a reservoir of
water and run into the desert where there is no water. My dear Lord, I am
completely incapable of controlling my mind, which is now driven by the
unbridled senses and is attracted by fruitive activities and their results.
My dear Lord, Your lotus feet cannot be appreciated by any person in
the conditional stage of material existence, but somehow or other I have
come near Your lotus feet, and I con?ider this to be Your causeless mercy
upon me. You can act in any way because You are the supreme controller.
I can thus understand that when a person becomes eligible to be delivered
from the path of repeated birth and death, it is only by Your causeless
mercy that he further progresses to become attached to Your causeless
devotional service."
Akrura fell down before the Lord and said, "My dear Lord, Your
transcendental eternal form is full of knowledge. Simply by concentrating
one's mind upon Your form, one can understand in full knowledge every
thing that be, because You are the original source of all knowledge. You
are the supreme powerful, possessing all kinds of energies. You are the
Supreme Brahman and the Supreme Person, supreme controller and master
of the material energies. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You because
You are Vasudeva, the resting place of all creation. You are the all
pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead, and Y ou are also the Supreme
Soul residing in everyone's heart and giving direction to act. Now, my Lord,
I am completely surrendered unto You. Please give me Your protection."
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Thirty-ninth Chapter of
Kr  a, "Prayers by A kmra. "
40 I Krsna Enters Mathura• • •
While Akriira was offering his prayers to the Supreme Personality of God
head, the L ord disappeared from the water, exactly as an expert dramatic
actor changes his dress and assumes his original feature. After the Vi tiU
miirti disappeared, Akriira got out of the water. Finishing the rest of his
ritualistic performance, he went near the chariot of Balarama and Kr tla and
was struck with wonder. Kr !la asked whether he had seen something
wonderful within the water or in space. Akriira said, "My dear Lord, all
wonderful things taht are happening within this world, either in the sky or
in the water or on the land, are factually appearing in Your universal form.
S o when I have seen You, what wonderful things have I not seen ? " This
statement confirms the Vedic version that one who knows Kr tla knows
everything, and one who has seen Kr pa has seen everything, regardless of
how wonderful a thing may be. "My dear L ord," Akriira continued, " there
cannot be anything more wonderful than Your transcendental form. When
I have seen Y our transcendental form , what is there left to see?"
After saying this, Akriira immediately started the chariot. B y the end
of the day, they had almost reached the precincts of Mathura. When passing
from V rndavana to Mathura, all passersby along the way who saw Kr tla
and Balarama could not help but look at Them again and again. In the
meantime, the other inhabitants of V rndavana, headed by N anda and
U pananda, had already reached Mathura by going through forests and
rivers, and they were awaiting the arrival of Krwa and Balarama. Upon
reaching the entrance to Mathura, Kr !la and Balarama got down from the
chariot and shook hands with Akriira. Kr pa informed Akriira, " You may
go home now because We shall enter Mathura along with Our associates. "
Akriira replied, "My dear L ord, I cannot go t o Mathura alone , leaving You
aside. I am Your surrendered servant. Please do not try to avoid me.
Please, come along with me , with Your elder brother and cowherd boy
friends, and sanctify my house. My dear Lord, if Y ou come , my home will
2 6 1
262 Kf !la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
be sanctified by the dust of Your lotus feet. The water emanating from the
perspiration of Your lotus feet, namely the Ganges, purifies everyone,
including the forefathers, the fire-god and all other demigods. King Bali
Maharaja has become famous simply by washing Your lotus feet, and all
his relatives have achieved the heavenly planet due to his contact with the
Ganges water. Bali Maharaja himself enjoyed all material opulences and
later on was elevated to the highest exalted position of liberation. The
Ganges water not only sanctifies the three worlds but is carried on the
head of Lord Siva. 0 Supreme Lord of all lords! 0 master of the universe !
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You . "
O n hearing this, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kr  a, replied,
"Akriira, I shall surely come to your home with My elder brother
Balarama, but only after killing all the demons who are envious of the
Y adu dynasty. In this way I shall please all My relatives." Akriira became
a little disappointed by these words of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, but he could not disregard the order. He therefore entered
Mathura and informed Kamsa about the arrival of Kr  a, and then he
entered his own home.
After the departure of Akriira, Lord Kr  a, Balarama and the cowherd
boys entered Mathura to see the city. They observed that the gate of
Mathura was made of first-class marble, very well constructed, and the
doors were made of pure gold. There were gorgeous gardens all around,
and the whole city was encircled by cannons so that no enemy could
enter very easily. They saw that all the crossings of the roads were
decorated with gold. And there were many richmen's houses, all appearing
symmetrical, as if constructed by one engineer. The houses were decorated
with costly jewels, and each and every house had nice compounds of
trees, fruits and flowers. The gardens, corridors and verandas of the houses
were decorated with silk cloth and embroidery work in jewels and pearls.
In front of the balcony windows were pigeons and peacocks walking and
cooing. All the grain dealers' shops within the city were decorated with
different kinds of flowers and garlands, newly grown grass and blossoming
roses. The central doors of the houses were decorated with water pots
filled with water, and a mixture of water and yogurt was sprinkled all
around. There were flowers decorated with burning lamps of different
sizes over the doors, and there were also decorations of fresh mango
leaves and silk festoons on all the doors of the houses.
When the news spread that Kr  1a, Balarama and the cowherd boys were
within Mathura City, all the inhabitants gathered, and the ladies and girls
immediately went up to the roofs of the houses to see Them. They had
Krsna Enters Mathura 263
been awaiting the arrival of Kr pa and Balarama with great anxiety, and
in their extreme eagerness to see Kr va and Balarama, the ladies did not
dress themselves very properly. Some of them placed their dress in the
wrong place. Some annointed their eyes on one side only, and some wore
ankle bells only on one leg or only one earring. Thus in great haste, not
even decorated properly, they came to see Kr  1a from the roofs. Some of
them had been taking their lunch, but as soon as they heard that Krwa
and Balarama were in the city, they left their eating and ran to the roof.
Some of them were in the bathroom, taking their baths, but without
properly finishing their baths, they came to see Kr va and Balarama.
Passing by very slowly and smiling, Lord Krwa immediately stole their
hearts. He who is the husband of the goddess of fortune passed through
the street like an elephant. For a very long time the women of Mathura
had heard about Kr va and Balarama and Their uncommon character
istics, and they were very much attracted and eager to see Them. Now
when they actually saw Kr pa and Balarama passing on the street and saw
Them sweetly smiling, the ladies' joy reached the point of ecstasy. When
they actually saw Them with their eyes, they took Kr pa and Balarama
within their hearts and began to embrace Them to their fullest desire.
Their hairs stood up in ecstasy. They had heard of Krwa, but they had
never seen Him, and now their longing was relieved. After going up on the
roofs of the palaces of Mathura, the ladies began to shower flowers upon
Kr pa and Balarama. When the brothers were passing through the streets,
all the b rahmanas in the neighborhood also went out with sandalwood and
flowers and respectfully welcomed Them to the city. All the residents of
Mathura began to talk among themselves about the elevated and pious
activities of the people of V rndavana. The residents of Mathur a were
surprised at the pious activities the cowherd men in Vrndavana must have
performed in their previous lives to be able to see Krwa and Balarama
daily as cowherd boys.
While Krwa and Balarama were passing in this way, They saw a washer
man and dyer of clothing. Kr pa was pleased to ask him for some nice
clothing. He also promised that if the washerman would deliver the nicest
dyed cloth to Him, he would be very happy, and all good fortune would
be his. Krwa was neither beggar nor was He in need of clothing, but by
this request He indicated that everyone should be ready to offer to Kr va
whatever He wants. That is the purpose of Kr va consciousness.
Unfortunately, this washerman was a servant of Kamsa and therefore
could not appreciate the demand of Lord Kr va, the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. This is the effect of bad association. He could have immediately
264 Kr t;ta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
delivered the clothing to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who
promised him all good fortune, but being a servant of Kamsa, the
sinful demon could not accept the offer. Instead of being pleased, he was
very angry and refused the Lord's request saying, "How is it that You are
asking clothing which is meant for the king?" The washerman then began
to instruct Kr  a and Balarama: "My dear boys, in the future don't be so
impudent as to ask for things which belong to the king. Otherwise, You
will be punished by the government men. They will arrest You and punish
You, and You will be in difficulty. I have practical experience of this fact.
Anyone who unlawfully wants to use the king's property is very severely
punished."
On hearing this, Lord Kr  a, the son of Devaki, became very angry at
the washerman, and striking him with the upper portion of His hand, He
separated the man's head from his body. The washerman fell down dead
on the ground. In this way Lord Kr  a confirmed the statement that every
limb of His body is capable of doing everything He likes. Without a sword,
but simply with His hand, he cut off the head of the washerman. This is
proof that the Supreme Lord is omnipotent. If He wants to do something,
He can do it without extraneous help.
After this ghastly incident, the employees of the washerman immediately
dispersed, leaving the clothing. Kr  a and Balarama took possession of it
and dressed according to Their choice ; the rest of the clothes were offered
to the cowherd boys, who also used them as they desired. What they did
not use remained there. They then continued to proceed. In the meantime,
a devotee-tailor took the opportunity of service and prepared some nice
clothes from the cloth for Kr  la and Balarama. Thus being very nicely
attired, Krwa and Balarama looked like elephants dressed with colored
clothings on the full moon day of the dark moon. Krwa was very much
pleased with the tailor and gave him the benediction of siimpya-muk ti,
which means that after leaving his body, he would be liberated and would
attain a body exactly like fourhanded Naraya a's in the Vaiku tha planets.
He also granted him that as long as he would live he would earn sufficient
opulence to be able to enj oy sense gratification. By this incident Krwa
provec\ that those who are Krwa conscious devotees will not be lacking
material enjoyment or sense gratification. They will have sufficient oppor
tunity for such things, but after leaving this life they will be allowed to
enter the spiritual planets of V aiku thaloka or Kr  aloka, Goloka
Vrndavana.
After dressing nicely, Krwa and Balarama went to a florist of the name
Sudama. As soon as they reached the precinct of his house, the florist
Krsna Enters Mathura 265
immediately came out and with great devotion fell down on his face to
offer his respectful obeisances. He offered a nice seat to Kr r;Ia and
Balarama and asked his assistant to bring out flowers and betel nuts
smeared with pulp of candana. The florist's welcome greatly satisfied
the Lord.
The florist very humbly and submissively offered his prayers to the
Lord, saying, .. My dear Lord, because You have come to my place, I think
all my forefathers and all my worshipable superiors are pleased and
delivered. My dear Lord, You are the supreme cause of all causes of this
cosmic manifestation, but for the benefit of the residents of this earthly
planet, You have appeared with Your plenary portion to give protection to
Your devotees and annihilate the demons. You are equally disposed as the
friend of all living entities; You are the Supersou1, and You do not
discriminate between friend and enemy. Yet You are pleased to give Your
devotees the special result of their devotional activities. My Lord, I am
praying that You please tell me whatever You wish me to do, because I am
Your eternal servant. If You will allow me to do something, it will be a
great favor to me." The florist, Sudama, was greatly pleased within his
heart by seeing Krwa and Balarama in his place, and thus, as his choicest
desire, he made two exquisite garlands of various flowers and presented
them to the Lord. Both Krwa and Balarama were very pleased with his
sincere service, and Kr  a offered the florist His salutation and benediction,
which He is always prepared to bestow upon the surrendered souls. When
the florist was offered benediction, he begged from the Lord that he might
remain His eternal servant in devotional service and by such service do
good to all living creatures. By this, it is clear that a devotee of the Lord in
Kr r;J.a consciousness should not be simply satisfied by his own advance
ment in devotional service; he must be willing to work for the welfare of
all others. This example was followed by the six Gosvamis of V rndavana.
It is therefore stated in their prayer, lokaniirh hitakiirirwu: V ai  avas, or
devotees of the Lord, are not selfish. Whatever benefit they derive from
the Supreme Personality of Godhead as benediction they want to distribute
to all other persons. That is the greatest of all humanitarian activities. Being
satisfied with the florist, Lord Krwa not only gave him benediction for
whatever he wanted, but over and above that, He offered him all material
opulences, family prosperity, long duration of life, and whatever else his
heart desired within the material world.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Fortieth Chapter of Kr r;J.a,
"Kr v-a Enters Mathura. "
4 1 I The Breaking of the Bow
in the Sacrificial Arena
After leaving the florist's place, Kr !la and Balarama saw a hunchbacked
young woman carrying a dish of sandalwood pulp through the streets.
Since Kr !la is the reservoir of all pleasure, He wanted to make all His
companions j oyous by cutting a j oke with the hunchbacked woman. Kr !la
addressed her, "0 tall young woman, who are you? Tell Me, for whom
are you carrying this sandalwood pulp in your hand? I think you should
offer this sandalwood to Me, and if you do so I am sure you will be
fortunate. " Krwa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and He knew
everything about the hunchback. By His inquiry He indicated that there
was no use in serving a demon ; one had better serve Kr !la and Balarama
and. get rid of the result of sins.
The woman replied to Kr !la, "My dear S yamasundara, dear beautiful
dark boy, Y ou may know that I am engaged as maidservant of Kamsa.
I am supplying him pulp of sandalwood daily. The king is very pleased with
me for supplying this nice thing, but now I see that there is no one who can
better be served by this pulp of sandalwood than Y ou two brothers. "
Being captivated by the beautiful features of Kr !la and Balarama, Their
talking, Their smiling, Their glancing and other activities, the hunchbacked
woman began to smear the pulp of sandalwood over Their bodies with
great satisfaction and devotion. The two transcendental beggars, Kr !la
and Balarama, were naturally beautiful and had beautiful complexions,
and They were nicely dressed in colorful garments. The upper portions
of Their bodies were already very attractive, and when the hunchbacked
woman smeared Their bodies with sandalwood pulp, They looked even
more beautiful. Kr !la was very pleased by this service, and He began to
consider how to reward her. In other words, in order to draw the attention
of the Lord, the Kr !la conscious devotee has to serve Him in great love and
devotion. Kr !la cannot be pleased by any action other than transcendental
266
The Breaking of the Bow in the Sacrificial Arena 267
loving service unto Him. Thinking like this, Lord Kf§!ta pressed the
feet of the hunchbacked woman with His toes and, capturing her cheeks
with His fingers, gave her a jerk in order to make her straight. At once the
hunchbacked woman looked like a beautiful straight girl, with broad hips,
thin waist and very nice, well shaped breasts. Since Kr§ a was pleased with
the service of the hunchbacked woman, and since she was touched by
Krwa's hands, she became the most beautiful girl among women. This
incident shows that by serving Kr§ a the devotee immediately becomes
elevated to the most exalted position. In all respects, devotional service is
so potent that anyone who takes to it becomes qualified with all godly
qualities. Kr§ a was attracted to the hunchbacked woman not for her
beauty but for her service; as soon as she rendered service, she immediately
became the most beautiful woman. A Kr§ a conscious person does not
have to be qualified or beautiful; after becoming Kr§ a conscious and
rendering service unto Kr§ a, he becomes very qualified and beautiful.
When the woman was turned by Krwa's favor into an exquisitely
beautiful young girl, she naturally felt very much obliged to Kr§ a, and
she was also attracted by His beauty. Without hesitation, she caught the
rear part of His cloth and began to snatch it. She smiled flirtatiously and
admitted that she was agitated by lusty desires. She forgot that she was on
the street and before the elder brother of Kr§ a and His friends.
She frankly proposed to Kr§ a: "My dear hero, I cannot leave You in
this way. You must come to my place. I am already very much attracted
to Your beauty, so I must receive You well, for You are the best among
males. You must also be very kind upon me." In plain words she proposed
that Kr9 a come to her home and satisfy her lusty desires. Krwa, of course,
felt a little bit embarassed in front of His elder brother, Balarama, but He
knew that the girl was simple and attracted; therefore He simply smiled
at her words. Looking towards His cowherd boy friends, he replied to the
girl, "My dear beautiful girl, I am very much pleased by your invitation,
and I must come to your home after finishing My other business here.
Such a beautiful girl like you is the only means •f solace for a person
like Me, for I am away from home and not married. Certainly, as a suitable
girl friend, you can give us relief from all kinds of mental agitation."
Kr§ a satisfied the girl in this way with sweet words. Leaving her there,
He began to proceed down the street of the marketplace where the
citizens were prepared to receive Him with various kinds of presentations,
especially betel nuts, flowers and sandalwood.
The mercantile men in the market worshiped Kr§ a and Balarama with
great respect. When Kr9 a was passing through the street, all the women
268 Kr :.;ta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
in the surrounding houses came to see Him, and some of the younger ones
almost fainted, being captivated by His beauty. Their hair and tight
dresses loosened, and they forgot where they were standing.
Kr va next inquired from the citizens as to the location of the place of
sacrifice. Kamsa had arranged for the sacrifice called Dhanur-yajna, and to
designate this particular sacrifice he had placed a big bow near the sacrificial
altar. The bow was very big and wonderful and resembled the rainbow in
the sky. Within the sacrificial arena, this bow was protected by many
constables and watchmen engaged by King Kamsa. As Krwa and Balarama
approached the bow, they were warned not to go nearer, but Kr p.a
ignored this warning. He forcibly went up and immediately took the big
bow in His left hand. After stringing the bow in the presence of the crowd,
He drew it and broke it at the middle into two parts, exactly as an elephant
breaks sugar cane in the field. Everyone present appreciated Kr va's power.
The sound of the bow cracking filled both sky and land and was heard by
Kamsa. When Kamsa heard what had happened, he began to fear for his
life. The caretaker of the bow, who was standing by watching, became
very angry. He ordered his men to take up weapons, and he began to rush
towards Krwa, shouting, "Arrest Him! Kill Him! Kill Him! " Krwa and
Balarama were surrounded. When They saw the threatening motions of the
guards, they became angry, and taking up the two pieces of the broken
bow, They began to beat off all the caretaker's men. While this turmoil
was going on, Kamsa 3ent a small group of troops to assist the caretakers,
but both Kr va and Balarama fought with them also and killed them.
After this, Kr va did not proceed further into the sacrificial arena but
went out the gate and proceeded towards Their resting camp. Along the
way, He visited various places in Mathura City with great delight. Seeing
the activities and wonderful prowess of Krwa, all the citizens of Mathura
began to consider the two brothers to be demigods who had come down
to Mathura, and they all looked upon Them with great astonishment. The
two brothers strolled carefree in the street, not caring for the law and order
of Kamsa.
When evening came, Krwa and Balarama, with Their cowherd boy
friends, went to the outskirts of the city where all their cars were as
sembled. Thus Krwa and Balarama gave some preliminary hints of Their
arrival to Kamsa, and he could understand what severe type of danger was
awaiting him the next day in the sacrificial arena.
When Kr p.a and Balarama were going from V rndavana to Mathura, the
inhabitants of v rndavana had imagined the great fortune of the citizens of
Mathura in being able to see the wonderful beauty of Kr§va, who is
The Breaking of the Bow in the Sacrificial Arena 269
worshiped by His pure devotees as well as the goddess of fortune. The
fantasies of the residents of V rndavana were actually realized, for the
citizens of Mathura became fully satisfied by seeing Krwa.
When Kr  a returned to His camp, H e was taken care of by servants
who washed His lotus feet, gave Him a nice seat and offered Him milk and
. palatable dishes of foodstuffs. After taking supper and thinking of the
next day's program, H e very peacefully began to take rest. Thus He passed
the night there.
On the other side, when Kamsa came to understand about the breaking
of his wonderful bow and the killing of the caretaker and soldiers by
Kr  a, he could partially realize the power of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. H e could realize that the eighth son of Devaki had appeared and
that now his death was imminent. Thinking of his imminent death, he
could not rest the entire night. He began to have many inauspicious
visions, and he could understand that both Kr  a and Balarama, who had
approached the precincts of the city, were his messengers of death. Kamsa
began to see various kinds of inauspicious signs, both awake and dreaming.
When he looked in the mirror he could not see his head, although the head
was actually present. He could see the luminaries in the sky in double,
although there was only one set factually. He began to see holes in his
shadow, and he could hear high buzzing sound within his ears. All the trees
before him appeared to be made of gold, and he could not see his own
footprints in dust or muddy clay. In dream he saw various kinds of ghosts
being carried in a carriage drawn by donkeys. He also dreamed that some
one gave him poison, and he was drinking it. He dreamed also that he was
going naked with a garland of flowers and was smearing oil all over his
body. Thus, as Kamsa saw various signs of death both awake and sleeping,
he could understand that death was certain, and thu.s in great anxiety he
could not rest that night. Just after the night expired, he busily arranged
for the wrestling match.
The wrestling arena was nicely cleansed and decorated with flags, fes
toons and flowers, and the match was announced by the beating of kettle
drums. The platform appeared very beautiful due to streamers and flags.
Different types of galleries were arranged for respectable persons-kings,
briihmar-as and k§atriyas. The various kings had reserved thrones, and others
had arranged seats also. Kamsa finally arrived, accompanied by various
ministers and secretaries, and he sat on the raised platform especially meant
for him. Unfortunately, although he was sitting in the center of all gov
erning executive heads, his heart was palpitating in fear of death. Cruel
death evidentally does not care even for a person as powerful as Kamsa.
270 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
When death comes, it does not care for anyone's exalted position.
When everything was complete, the wrestlers, who were to exhibit their
skills before the assembly, walked into the arena. They were decorated
with bright ornaments and dress. Some of the famous wrestlers were
CaJ;lilra, Mu pka, Sala, Kuta and Tosala. Being enlivened by the musical
concert, they passed through with ,great alacrity. All the respectable
cowherd men who came from Vrndavana, headed by Nanda, were also
welcomed by Kamsa. After presenting Kamsa with the milk products they
had brought with them, the cowherd men also took their respective seats
by the side of the king, on a platform especially meant for them.
Thus ends , the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Forty-first Chapter of
Kr lJa, "The Breaking of the Bow in the Sacrificial Arena . " .
42 I The Killing of the Elephant Kuvalayapl a
After taking their baths and finishing all other morning duties, Kr p.a
and Balarama could hear the beating of the kettledrums in the wrestling
camp. They immediately prepared Themselves to proceed to the spot to
see the fun. When Kr p.a and Balarama reached the gate of the wrestling
camp , They saw a big elephant of the name Kuvalayapi9a being tended by
a caretaker. The caretaker was deliberately blocking Their entrance by
keeping the elephant in front of the gateway. Kr p.a could understand the
purpose of the caretaker, and He prepared Himself by tightening His dress
before combatting the elephant. He began to address the caretaker in a
very grave voice, as resounding as a clou d : " Y ou miscreant caretaker, give
way and let Me pass through the gate. If you block My way, I shall send
you and your elephant to the house of death personified."
The caretaker, being thus insulted by Kr p.a, became very angry, and in
order to challenge Kr p.a, as was previously planned, he provoked the
elephant to attack. The elephant then moved before Kr p.a like inevitable
death. It rushed towards Him and tried to catch Him with its trunk, but
Krwa very dexterously moved behind the elephant. Being able to see only
to the end of its nose, the elephant could not see Kr p.a hiding behind its
legs, but it tried to capture Him with its trunk. Kr p.a again very quickly
escaped capture, and He again ran behind the elephant and caught its tail.
H olding the elephant by its tail, Kr p.a began to pull it, and with very great
strength He dragged it for at least twenty-five yards, just as Garu9a drags
an insignificant snake. Kr p.a pulled the elephant from this side to that,
from right to left, just as He used to pull the tail of a calf in His childhood.
After this, Kr p.a went in front of the elephant and gave it a strong slap.
He then slipped away from the elephant's view and ran to its back. Then,
falling down on the ground, Kr p.a placed Himself in front of the elephant's
two legs and caused it to trip and fall. Kr p.a immediately got up, but the
271
272 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
elephant, thinking that He was still lying down, tried to push an ivory
tusk through the body of Kr !la by forcibly stabbing it into the ground.
Although the elephant was harassed and angry, the caretaker riding on its
head tried to provoke it further. The elephant then rushed madly towards
Kr !J.a. As soon as it came within reach, Kr !la caught hold of the trunk
and pulled the elephant down. When the elephant and caretaker fell,
Krwa jumped up on the elephant's back and broke it and killed the (
caretaker also. After killing the elephant, Kr !la took an ivory tusk on His
shoulder. Decorated with drops of perspiration and sprinkled with the
blood of the elephant, He felt very blissful, and thus He began to proceed
towards the wrestling camp. Lord Balarama took the other tusk of the
elephant on His shoulder. Accompanied by Their cowherd boy friends,
They entered the arena.
When Kr !la entered the wrestling arena with Balarama and Their
friends, He appeared differently to different people according to their
different relationships (rasas) with Him. Krwa is the reservoir of all
pleasure and all kinds of rasas, both favorable and unfavorable. He appeared
to the wrestlers exactly like a thunderbolt. To the people in general He
appeared as the most beautiful personality. To the females He appeared to
be the most attractive male, Cupid personified, and thus increased their
lust. The cowherd men who were present there looked upon Kr !la as their
own kinsman, coming from the same village of V rndavana. The k§atriya
kings who were present saw Him as the strongest ruler. To the parents of
Krwa, Nanda and Yasoda, He appeared to be the most loving child. To
Kamsa, the king of the Bhoja dynasty, He appeared to be death personi
fied. To the unintelligent, He appeared to be an incapable personality. To
the yogis present, He appeared to be the Supersoul. To the members of the
V r tli dynasty He appeared to be the most celebrated descendant. Thus
appreciated differently by different kinds of men present, Krwa entered
the wrestling arena with Balarama and His cowherd boy friends. Having
heard that Krwa had already killed the elephant, Kuvalayapi a, Kamsa
knew beyond doubt that Krwa was formidable. He thus became very much
afraid of Him. Kr pa and Balarama had long hands. They were beautifully
dressed, and They were attractive to all the people assembled there. They
were dressed as if They were going to act on a dramatic stage, and They
drew the attention of all people.
The citizens of Mathura City who saw Kr tla, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, became very pleased and began to look on His face with
insatiable glances, as if they were drinking the nectar of heaven. Seeing
Kr !la gave them so much pleasure that it appeared that they were not
The Killing of the Elephant Kuvalayapi a 273
only drinking the nectar of seeing His face, but were smelling the aroma
and licking up the taste of His body and were embracing Him and Balarama
with their arms. They began to talk among themselves about the two
transcendental brothers. For a long time they had heard of the beauty and
activities of Krwa and Balarama, but now they were personally seeing
Them face to face. They thought that Kr l)a and Balarama were two
plenary incarnations of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Naraya!la,
who had appeared in v rndavana.
The citizens of Mathura began to recite Kr !la's pastimes, His birth as
the son of Vasudeva, His being taken into the care of N anda Maharaja and
his wife in Gokula, and all those events leading to His coming to Mathura.
They spoke of the killing of the demon Putana, as well as the killing of
Tr!lavarta, who came as a whirlwind. They also recalled the deliverance of
the twin brothers from within the yamala arjuna trees. The citizens of
Mathura spoke among themselves: Smi.khasura, Ke81, Dhenukasura and
many other dem ns were killed by Kr  a and Balarama in V rndavana.
Kr  a also saved all the cowherd men of V rndavana from devastating fire.
He chastised the Kaliya snake in the water of Yamuna, and He curbed the
false pride of the heavenly king, Indra. Kr !la held up the great Govardhana
Hill in one hand for seven continuous days and saved all the people of
Gokula from incessant rain, hurricane and windstorm." They also began to
remember other enlivening activities: "The damsels of Vrndavana were so
pleased by seeing Kr  a's beauty and participating in His activities that
they forgot the purpose of material existence. By seeing and thinking of
Kr !la, they forgot all sorts of material fatigue." The Mathura citizens
discussed the dynasty of Yadu, saying that because of Kr  a's appearance
in this dynasty, the Y adus would remain the most celebrated family in the
whole universe. While they were thus talking about the activities of Kr !la
and Balarama, they heard the vibrations of different bands announcing the
wrestling match.
The famous wrestler Ca!lura then began to talk with Krwa and Balarama.
"My dear Kr !la and Balarama," he said, "we have heard about Your past
activities. You are great heroes, and therefore the king has called you. We
have heard that Y o u r arms are very strong. The king and all the people
present here desire to see a display of Your wrestling abilities. A citizen
should be obedient and please the mind of the ruling king; acting in that
way, the citizen attains all kinds of good fortune. One who does not care
to act obediently is made unhappy because of the king's anger. You are
cowherd boys, and we have heard that while tending Y our cows in the
forest, You enj oy wrestling with each other. We wish, therefore, for You
274 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
to join with us in wrestling so that all the people present here, along with
the king, will be pleased."
Krwa immediately understood the purpose of Cavura's statements, and
He prepared to wrestle with him. But according to the time and circum
stances, He spoke as follows: "You are the subject. . of the King of Bhoja,
and you live in the jungle. We are also indirectly his subjects, and we try
to please him as far as possible. This offer of wrestling is a great favor of
his, but the fact is that We are simply boys. We sometimes play in the
forest of Vrndavana with our friends who are our own age. We think that
to combat persons of equal age and strength is good for us, but to fight
great wrestlers like you would not be good for the audience. It would
contradict their religious principles." Kr J!a thus indicated that the cele
brated, strong wrestlers should not challenge Kr .pa and Balarama to fight.
In reply to this, Ca iira said, "My dear Kr .pa, we can understand that
You are neither a child nor a young man. You are transcendental to every
one, as is Your big brother, Balarama. You have already killed the elephant
KuvalayapiQ.a, who was capable of fighting and defeating other elephants.
You have killed him in a wonderful way. Because of Your strength, it
behooves You to compete with the stronger wrestlers amongst us. I
therefore wish to wrestle with Y ou, and Y our elder brother, Balarama, will
wrestle with Mu tika. "
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Forty-second Chapter of
Kr va, "The Killing of the Elephant Kuvalayiipit;fa. "
4 3 I The Killing of Kamsa
After Kamsa's wrestlers expressed their determination, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, the killer of Madhu, confronted C artiira, and L ord
Balarama, the son of Rohirti, confronted Mu tika. Kr rta and C artlira and
then Balarama and Mu tika locked themselves hand to hand, leg to leg, and
each began to press against the other with a view to come out victorious.
They j oined palm to palm, calf to calf, head to head, chest to chest and
began to strike each other. The fighting increased as they pushed one an
other from one place to another. One captured another and threw him
down on the ground, and another rushed from the back to the front of
another and tried to overcome him with a hold. The fighting increased step
by step. There was picking up, the dragging and pushing, and then the legs
and hands were locked together. All the arts of wrestling were perfectly
exhibited by the parties, as each tried his best to defeat his opponent.
But the audience in the wrestling arena was not very satisfied because
the combatants did not appear to be equally matched. They considered
Kr rta and Balarama to be mere boys before the wrestlers C artlira and
Mu tika, who were huge men as solid as stone. Being compassionate and
favoring Kr rta and Balarama, many members of the audience began to
talk as follows. " D ear friends, there is danger here. " Another said, "'Even
in front of the king this wrestling is going on between incompatable sides. "
The audience had lost their sense of enj oyment. They could not encourage
the fighting between the strong and the weak. " Mu tika and C artlira are
just like thunderbolts, as strong as great mountains, and Kr rta and
Balarama are two delicate boys of very tender age. The principle of justice
has already left this assembly. Persons who are aware of the civilized
principles of justice will not remain to watch this unfair match. Those
taking part in this wrestling match are not very much enlightened ; therefore
whether they speak or remain silent, they are being subjected to the reac-
275
276 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
tions of sinful activities." "But my dear friends," another in the assembly
spoke out, "just look at the face of Kr§ a. There are drops of perspiration
on His face from chasing His enemy, and His face appears like the lotus
flower with drops of water. And do you see how the face of Lord
Balarama has turned especially beautiful? There is a reddish hue on His
white face because He is engaged in a strong wrestling match with
Mustika.". .
Ladies in the assembly also addressed one another. "Dear friends, just
imagine how fortunate the land of V rndavana is where the Supreme Per
sonality of Godhead Himself is present, always decorated with flower gar
lands and engaged in tending cows along with His brother, Lord Balarama.
He is always accompanied by His cowherd boy friends, and He plays His
transcendental flute. The residents of Vrndavana are fortunate to be able to.
constantly see the lotus feet of Kr9 a and Balarama, which are worshiped
by great demigods like Lord Siva and Brahma and the goddess of fortune.
We cannot estimate how many pious activities were executed by the
damsels of V rajabhumi so that they were able to enjoy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and look on the unparalleled beauty of His
transcendental body. The beauty of the  ord is beyond compare. N o one
is higher or equal to Him in beauty of complexion or bodily luster. Kr9 a
and Balarama are the reservoir of all kinds of opulence-namely wealth,
strength, beauty, fame, knowledge and renunciation. The gopis are so
fortunate that they can see and think of Kr§ a twenty-four hours a day,
beginning from their milking the cows or husking the paddy or churning
the butter in the morning. While engaged in cleaning their houses and
washing their floors, they are always absorbed in the thought of Krwa."
The gopis give a perfect example of how one can execute Kr9 a con
sciousness even if he is in different types of material engagement. By
constantly being absorbed in the thought of Kr  a, one cannot be affected
by the contamination of material activities. The gopis are, therefore,
perfectly in trance, samiidhi, the highest perfectional stage of mystic
power. In the Bhagavad-gitii, it is confirmed that one who is constantly
thinking of Kf§!la is a first-class yogi among all kinds of yogis. "My dear
friends," one lady told another, "we must accept the gopis' activities to be
the highest form of piety; otherwise, how could they have achieved the
opportunity of seeing Kr§ a both morning and evening when He goes to
the pasturing ground with His cows and cowherd boy friends and returns
in the evening? They frequently see Him playing on His flute and smiling
very brilliantly."
When Lord Krwa, the Supersoul of every living being, understood that
The Killing of Kamsa 277
the ladies in the assembly were anxious for Him, He decided not to
continue wrestling but to kill the wrestlers immediately. The parents of
Krwa and Balarama, namely N anda Maharaja, Yasoda, V asudeva and
Devaki, were also very anxious because they did not know the unlimited
strength of their children. Lord Balarama was fighting with the wrestler
Mu tika in the same way that Krwa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
was fighting and wrestling with Ca ura. Lord Kr  a appeared to be cruel
to Ca ura, and He immediately struck him thrice with His fist. The great
wrestler was jolted, to the astonishment of the audience. Ca ura then took
his last chance and attacked Kr  a, just as one hawk swoops upon another.
Folding his two hands, he began to strike the chest of Krwa, but Lord
Kr  a was not even slightly disturbed, no more than an elephant that is
hit by a flower garland. Krwa quickly caught the two hands of Ca ura and
began to wheel him around, and simply by this centrifugal action, Ca ura
lost his life. Kr  a then threw him to the ground. Ca ura fell just like the
flag of Indra, and all his nicely decorated ornaments were scattered hither
and thither.
Mu tika also struck Balarama, and Balarama returned the stroke with
great force. Mu tika began to tremble, and blood and vomit flowed from
his mouth. Distressed, he gave up his vital force and fell down just as a tree
falls down in a hurricane. After the two wrestlers were killed, a wrestler
named Kuta came forward. Lord Balarama immediately caught him in His
left hand and killed him nonchalantly. Another wrestler of the name Sala
came forward, and Krwa immediately kicked him and cracked his head.
Another wrestler named Tosala came forward and was killed in the same
way. Thus all the great wrestlers were killed by Kr  a and Balarama, and
the remaining wrestlers began to flee from the assembly out of fear for
their lives. All the cowherd boy friends of Kr  a and Balarama approached
Them and congratulated Them with great pleasure. While drums beat and
they talked of the victory, the leg bells on the feet of Kr  a and Balarama
tinkled.
All people gathered there began to clap in great ecstasy, and no one
could estimate the bounds of their pleasure. The b riihmar.as present began
to praise Krwa and Balarama ecstatically. Only Kamsa was morose; he
neither clapped nor offered benediction to Krwa. Kamsa resented the
drums' being beaten for Kr  a's victory, and he was very sorry that the
wrestlers had been killed and had fled the assembly. He therefore imme
diately ordered the drum playing to stop and began to address his friends
as follows: "I order that these two sons of Vasudeva be immediately
driven out of Mathura. The cowherd boys who have come with Them
2 78 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
should be plundered and all their riches taken away. Nanda Mahadij a
should immediately be arrested and killed for his cunning behavior, and
the rascal V asudeva should also be killed without delay. Also my father,
Ugrasena, who has always supported my enemies against my will, should
be killed."
When Karhsa spoke in this way, Lord Krwa became very angry with
him , and within a second He jumped over the high guards of King Karhsa.
Karhsa was prepared for Kpg1a's attack, for he knew from the beginning
that He was to be the cause of his death. He immediately unsheathed his
sword and prepared to answer the challenge of Krwa with sword and
shield. As Karhsa wielded his sword up and down, hither and thither, Lord
Kr  a, the supreme powerful Lord, caught hold of him with great force.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the shelter of the complete
creation and from whose lotus navel the whole creation is manifested,,
immediately knocked the crown from the head of Karhsa and grabbed his:
long hair in His hand. He then dragged Karhsa fro m his seat to the wrestlin g
dias and threw him down. Then Krwa at once straddled his. ehest and
began to strike him over and over again. Simply from the strokes of His
fist, Karhsa lost his vital force.
In order to assure His parents that Karhsa was dead, Lord Kr  a dragged
him just as a lion drags an elephant after killing it. On sight of this, there
was a great roaring sound from all sides, as some spectators expressed
their jubilation and others cried in lamentation. From the day Karhsa
heard that he would be killed by the eighth son of D evaki, he was atways
thinking of Krwa twenty-four hours a day without any stoppage-even
while he was eating, while he was walking, while he was breathing-and
naturally he got the blessing of liberation. In the Bhagavad-gitii it is stated,
sadii tad-bhiiva-bhavital;t : a person gets his next life according to the
thoughts in which he is always absorbed. Karhsa was thinking of Kr  a
with His wheel, which means Naraya a who holds a wheel, conchshell,
lotus flower and club .
According to the opinion of authorities, Karhsa attained siiriipya-muk ti
after death, that is to say he attained the same form as Naraya!J.a (Vi  u).
On the V aiku tha planets all the inhabitants have the same bodily features
as Narayapa. After his death,  arhsa attained liberation and was promoted
to V aiku thaloka. From this instance we can understand that even a person
who thinks of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as an enemy gets
liberation and a place in a Vaiku tha planet, so what to speak of the pure
devotees who are always absorbed in favorable thoughts of Krwa? Even
an enemy who is killed by Krwa gets liberation and is placed in the
The Killing of Kamsa 279
impersonal brahmaj_yoti. Since the Supreme Personality of Godhead is all
good, anyone thinking of Him, either as enemy or as friend, gets liberation.
But the liberation of the devotee and the liberation of the enemy are not
the same. The enemy generally gets the liberation of siiyujya, and some
times he gets siiriipya liberation.
Kamsa had eight brothers, headed by Kanka. All of them were younger
than he, and when they learned that their elder brother had been killed,
they combined together and rushed towards Kr !la in great anger to kill
Him. Kamsa and his brothers were all Krwa's maternal uncles. They were
all brothers of Krwa's mother, Devaki. When Kr l!a killed Kamsa He killed
His maternal uncle, which is against the regulation of Vedic injunction.
Although Krwa is independent of all Vedic injunction, He violates the
Vedic injunction only in inevitable cases. Kamsa could not be killed by
anyone but Krwa ; therefore Krwa was obliged to kill him. As far as
Kamsa's eight brothers were concerned, Balarama took charge of killing
them. Baladima's mother, Rohil).i, although the wife of V asudeva, was not
the sister of Kamsa; therefore Balarama took charge of killing all of
Kamsa's eight brothers. He immediately took up an available weapon
(most probably the elephant's tusk which He carried) and killed the eight
brothers one after another, just as a lion kills a flock of deer. Krwa and
Balarama thus verified the statement that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead appears to give protection to the pious and to kill the impious
demons who are always enemies of the demigods.
The demigods from the higher planetary systems began to shower
flowers, congratulating Kr l!a and Balarama. Among the demigods were
powerful personalities like Lord Brahma and Siva, and all joined together
in showing their jubilation over Kamsa 's death. There was beating of drums
and showering of flowers from the heavenly planets, and the wives of the
demigods began to dance in ecstasy.
The wives of Kamsa and his eight brothers became aggrieved on account
of their husbands' sudden deaths, and all of them were striking their fore
heads and shedding torrents of tears. They were crying very loudly and
embracing the bodies of their husbands. The wives of Kamsa and his
brothers began to lament, addressing the dead bodies: "Our dear husbands,
you are so kind and are the protectors of your dependents. Now, after
your death, we are also dead, along with your homes and children. We are
no longer looking very auspicious. On account of your death, the au
spicious functions which were to take place, such as the sacrifice of the
bow, have all been spoiled. Our dear husbands, you treated persons ill who
were faultless, and as a result you have been killed. This is inevitable
280 Kr a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
because a person who torments an innocent person must be punished by
the laws of nature. We know that Lord Kr 9-a is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead. He is the supreme master of everything and the supreme
enj oyer of everything, and therefore anyone who neglects His authority
can never be happy, and ultimately, as you have, he meets death."
Since Kr 9-a was kind and affectionate to His aunts, He began to give
them solace as far as was possible. The ritualistic ceremonies after death
were then conducted under the personal supervision of Kr 9-a because He
happened to be the nephew of all the dead princes. After finishing this
business, Kr 9-a and Balarama immediately released Their father and
mother, Vasudeva and Devaki who had been imprisoned by Kani.sa. Kr 9-a
and Balarama fell at Their parents' feet and offered them prayers. Vasudeva
and Devaki had suffered so much trouble because Kr 9-a was their son; it
was because of Kr  1a that Kani.sa was always giving them trouble. Devaki
and Vasudeva were fully conscious of Kr 9-a 's exalted position as the
Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore, although Kr 9-a touched their
feet and offered obeisances and prayers to them, they did not embrace
Him, but simply stood up to hear the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Although Kr 9-a was born as their son, Vasudeva and Devaki were always
conscious of His position.
Thus ends the Bhaktivediinta purport of the Forty-third Chapter of
Kr 9-a, "The Killing of Kamsa. "
44 I Krsna Recovers the Son of His Teacher• • •
When L ord Kr !la saw that V asudeva and D evaki were remammg
standing in a reverential attitude, He immediately expanded His influence
of yogamiiyii so that they could treat Him and Balarama as children. As in
the material world the relationship existing between father and mother
and children can be established amongst different living entities by the
influence of the illusory energy, so, by the influence of yogamiiyii, the
devotee can establish a relationship in which the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is his child. After creating this situation by His yogamiiyii, Kr !la,
appearing with His elder brother Balarama as the most illustrious sons in
the dynasty of the Satvatas, very submissively and respectfully addressed
V asudeva and D evaki: "My dear fa the  and mother , although you have
always been very anxious for the protection of Our lives, you could not
enj oy the pleasure of having Us as your babies, as your growing boys and
as your · adolescent youths. " Kr  la indirectly praised the fatherhood of
Nanda Maharaja and motherhood of Y asoda as most glorious because
although He and Balarama were not their born sons, Nanda and Yasoda
actually enj oyed Their childhood pastimes . By nature's own arrangement ,
the childhood of the embodied living being is enj oyed by the parents. Even
in the animal kingdom the parents are found to be affectionate to the cubs.
Being captivated by the activities of their children , they take much care for
their well-being. As for V asudeva and D evaki, they were always very
anxious for the protection of their sons, Krwa and Balarama. That is why
Kr !la, after His appearance , was immediately transferred to another's
house. Balarama was also transferred from D evaki's womb to Rohini's
womb .
V asudeva and D evaki were full of anxieties for Kr§pa's and Balarama's
protection, and they could not enj oy Their childhood pastimes. Kr pa
said, "Unfortunately, being ordered by Our fate , We could not be raised
28 1
282 Kr  1a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
by Our own parents to enj oy childhood pleasures at home. My dear father
and mother, a man has a debt to pay to his parents , from whom he gets
this body which can bestow upon him all the benefits of material existence.
According to the Vedic injunction, this human form of life enables one to
perform all kinds of religious activities , fulfill all kinds of desires and
acquire all kinds of wealth. And only in this human form is there every
possibility that one can get liberation from material existence. This body
is produced by the combined efforts of the father and mother. Every
human being should be obliged to his parents and understand that he
cannot repay his debt to them. If, after growing up, a son does not try to
satisfy his parents by his actions or by an endowment of riches , he is surely
punished after death by the superintendent of death and made to eat his
own flesh. If a person is able to care for or give protection to old parents ,
children, the spiritual master, b rah ma!ws and other dependents , but does
not do so, he is considered to be already dead, although he is supposedly
breathing. My dear father and mother, you have always been very anxious
for Our protection, but unfortunately We could not render any service
unto you. Up to date We have simply wasted Our time ; We could not serve
you for reasons beyond Our control. Mother and father, please excuse Us
for Our sinful action. "
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead was speaking as an innocent
boy in very sweet words, both V asudeva and D evaki became captivated by
parental affection and embraced Them with great pleasure . They were
amazed and could not speak or answer the words of Kr  1a, but simply
embraced Him and Balarama in great affection and remained silent, shed
ding incessant tears.
Thus consoling His father and mother, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, appearing as the beloved son of D evaki, approached His grand
father U grasena and announced that U grasena would now be the King
of the Y adu kingdom. Kamsa had been forcibly ruling over the kingdom
of Y adu, in spite of the presence of his father, whom he had arrested. But
after the death of Kamsa, Kamsa's father was released and announced to
be the King of the Y adu kingdom. It appears that in those days, in the
western part of India, there were many small kingdoms, and they were
ruled by the Y adu dynasty, Andhaka dynasty, V f§ i dynasty and Bhoj a
dynasty. Maharaj a Ugrasena belonged t o the Bhoj a dynasty ; thercefore
Kf§ a indirectly declared that the king of the Bhoj a dynasty would be em
peror of the other small kingdoms . He willingly asked Maharaj a U grasena to
rule over Them because They were his subjects . The word praja is used both
for the progeny and for the citizens , so Kr pa belonged to the p raja, both
Kf§J)a Recovers the Son of His Teacher 283
as a grandson to .Maharaja Ugrasena and as a member of the Yadu dynasty.
He voluntarily accepted the rule of Maharaj a Ugrasena . He informed
Ugrasena : "Being cursed by the Y ayati , the kings of the Y adu dynasty
will not rise against the throne . It will be Our pleasure to serve you as
your servants . Our full cooperation with you will make your position more
exalted and secure so that the kings of other dynasties will not hesitate to
pay their respective revenues. Protected by Us, you will be honored even
by the demigods from the heavenly planets. My dear grandfather, out of
fear of lVI y late uncle Kamsa, all the kings belonging to the Y adu dynasty ,
V f pi dynasty, Andhaka dynasty, Madhu dynasty, D asarha dynasty and
Kukura dynasty were very anxious and disturbed. N ow you can pacify
them all and give them assurance of security. The whole kingdom will be
peaceful. "
All the kings i n the neighb oring area had left their homes i n fear of
Kamsa and were living in distant parts of the country. N ow, after the death
of Karitsa <ind the reinstatement of Ugrasena as king, the neighb oring kings
were given all kinds of presentations and comforts. Then they returned to
their respective homes . After this nice political arrangement, the citizens
of .Mathura were pleased to live in l\lathura, being protected by the strong
arms of Kr pa and Balarama. On account of good government in the
presence of Kr pa and Balarama, the inhabitants of Mathura felt complete
satisfaction in the fulfillment of all their materiaL desires and necessities ,
"and because they saw Krwa and Balarama daily, eye to eye , they soon
forgot all material miseries completely. As soon as they saw Kr pa and
Balaran1a coming out on the street , very nicely dressed and smiling and
looking here and there , the citizens were immediately filled with loving
ecstasies , simply by seeing the personal presence of l\lukunda. Muk unda
refers to one who can award liberation and transcendental bliss. Kr pa's
presence acted as such a vitalizing tonic that not only the younger
generation , _ but even the old men of l\lathura became fully invigorated
with youthful energy and strength by regularly seeing Him.
Nanda Maharaj a and Yasoda were also living in l\lathura because Kr pa
and Balarama were there , but after some time they wanted to go Lack
to V rndavana. Krwa and Balarama went before them and very feelingly
and affectionately embraced Nanda and Yasoda, and Kr pa began to speak
as follows : " l\l y dear father and mother, although 1 was Lorn of Vasudeva
and D evaki, y ou have been Our real father and mother , because from Our
very birth and childhood, you raised Us with gre at affection and love .
Your affectionate love for U s was more than an yone can offer one's own
children. Y ou are adually Our father and mother, be ..:ause y ou raised U s
284 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
as your own children at a time when We were just like orphans. For certain
reasons We were rejected by Our father and mother, and you protected
Us. My dear father and mother, I know you will be feeling separation
by returning to Vrndavana and leaving Us here, but please rest assured
that I shall be coming back to Vrndavana just after giving some satisfaction
to My real father and mother, Vasudeva and Devaki, My grandfather, and
other relatives and family members." Kr  a and Balarama satisfied Nanda
and Y asoda by sweet words and by presentation of various clothing,
ornaments and properly made utensils. They satisfied them, along with
their friends and neighbors who had come with them from Vrndavana to
Mathura, as fully as possible. On account of his excessive parental affection
for Balarama and Kr  a, Nanda Maharaja felt tears in his eyes, and he
embraced Them and started with the cowherd men for V rndavana.
After this, Vasudeva had his son initiated by sacred.thread as the token
of second birth, which is essential for the higher castes of human society.
Vasudeva called for his family priest and learned b riihmap.as, and the
sacred thread ceremony of Krwa and Balarama was duly performed.
During this ceremony, Vasudeva gave various ornaments in charity to the
b riihmwyas and endowed them with cows decorated with silken cloths and
golden ornaments. Previously, during the birth of Krwa and Balarama,
Vasudeva had wanted to give cows in charity to the b riihmar;as, but.being
imprisoned by Kamsa, he was able to do so only within his mind. With
the death of Kamsa the actual cows were given to the b riihmar;as. Then
Balarama and Krwa were duly initiated with the sacred thread ceremony,
and They repeated the chanting of the Giiyatri mantra. The Giiyatri mantra
is offered to the disciples after the sacred thread ceremony, and Balarama
and Kr  a properly discharged the duties of chanting this mantra. Anyone
who executes the chanting of this mantra has to abide by certain principles
and vows. Although Balarama and Krwa were both transcendental person
alities, They strictly followed the regulative principles. Both were initiated
by Their family priest Gargacarya, usually known as Gargamuni, the
iiciirya of the Yadu dynasty. According to Vedic culture, every respectable
person has an iiciirya, or spiritual master. One is not considered to be a
perfectly cultured man without being initiated and trained by an iiciirya.
It is said, therefore, that one who has approached an iiciirya is actually
in perfect knowledge. Lord Kr  a and Balarama were the Supreme Person
ality of Godhead, the master of all education and knowledge. There was
no need for Them to accept a spiritual master or iiciirya, yet for the
instruction of ordinary men, They also accepted a spiritual master for
advancement in spiritual knowledge.
Krsna Recovers the Son of His Teacher 285. . .
It is customary, after being initiated in the Gayatri mantra, for one to
live away from home for some time under the care of the acarya in order
to be trained in spiritual life. During this period one has to work under
the spiritual master as an ordinary menial servant. There are many rules
and regulations for a brahmacari living under the care of an acarya, and
both Lord Krwa and Balarama strictly followed those regulative principles
while living under the instruction of their spiritual master, Sandipani Muni,
in his place in northern India. According to scriptural injunctions, a
spiritual master should be respected and be regarded on an equal level
with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Both Kr ':a and Balarama
exactly followed those principles with great devotion and underwent
the regulations of b rahmacarya, and thus They satisfied Their spiritual
master, who instructed Them in Vedic knowledge. Being very satis
fied, Sandipani Mimi instructed Them in all the intricacies of V edic
wisdom as well as in supplementary literatures such as the Upani§ads.
Because Kf J).a and Balarama happened to be k§atriyas, They were
specifically trained in military science, politics and mathematics. In
politics there are six departments of knowledge-how to make peace,
how to fight, how to pacify,, how to divide and rule, how to give
shelter, etc. All these items were fully explained and instructed to Kf J).a
and Balarama.
The ocean is the source of water in a river. The cloud is created by the
evaporation of ocean water, and the same water is distributed as rain all
over the surface of the earth and then returns toward the ocean in rivers.
So Krwa and Balarama, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, are the
source of all kinds of knowledge, but because They were playing like
ordinary human boys, They set the example so that everyone would
receive knowledge from the right source. Thus They agreed to take know
ledge from a spiritual master.
After hearing only once from the teacher, Kr  a and Balarama learned
all the arts and sciences. In sixty-four days and sixty-four nights They
learned all the necessary arts and sciences that are required in human
society. During daytime They took lessons on a subject from the teacher,
and by nightfall, after having heard from the teacher, They were expert
in that department of knowledge.
First of all They learned how to sing, how to compose songs and how
to recognize the different tunes; They learned the favorable and un
favorable accents and meters, how to sing different kinds of rhythms and
melodies, and how to follow them by beating different kinds of drums.
They learned how to dance with rhythm, melody and different songs.
286 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
They learned how to write dramas, and They learned the various types of
paintings, beginning from different village arts up to the highest perfec
tional stage. They also learned how to paint tilaka on the face and make
different kinds of dots on the forehead and cheeks. Then They learned the
art of painting on the floor with liquid paste of rice and flour; such
paintings are very popular at auspicious ceremonies performed at house
hold affairs or in the temple. They learned how to make a resting place with
flowers and how to decorate clothing and leaves with colorful paintings.
They also learned how to set different valuable jewels in ornaments. They
learned the art of ringing water pots. Water pots are filled with water to a
certain measurement so that when one beats on the pots, different tunes
are produced, and when the pots are beaten together they produce a melo
dious sound. They also learned how to throw water in the rivers or the lakes
while taking a bath among friends. They also learned how to decorate with
flowers. This art of decorating can still be seen in various temples of Vrnda
vana during the summer season. It is called phulabiif}i. The dais, the throne,
the walls and 'the ceiling are all fully decorated, and a small, aromatic foun
tain of flowers is fixed in the center. Because of these floral decorations,
the people, fatigued from the heat of the summer season, become refreshed.
Kr p.a and Balarama learned the art of dressing hair in various styles and
fixing a helmet in different positions on the head. They also learned how
to perform on the theatrical stage, how to decorate dramatic actors with
flower ornaments over the ear, and how to sprinkle sandalwood pulp and
water to produce a nice fragrance. They also learned the art of performing
magical feats. Within the magical field there is an art called bahuriipi by
which a person dresses himself in such a way that when he approaches a
friend he cannot be recognized. They also learned how to make beverages
which are required at various times, and They studied syrups and tastes
and the effects of intoxication. They learned how to manipulate thin
threads for dancing puppets, and They learned how to string wires on
musical · instruments, such as the Vtl)ii, sitar and tampura, to produce
melodious sound . Then They learned puzzles and how to set and solve
them. They learned the art of reading books from which even a foolish
student can very quickly learn to read the alphabet and comprehend
writing. Then They learned how to rehearse and act out a drama. They
also studied the art of solving crossword pu zles, filling up the missing
space and making complete words.
They also learned how to draw pictographic literature. In some coun
tries in the world, pictographic literature is still current. A story is repre
sented by pictures; for instance, a man and a house are pictured to
Kr l)a Recovers the Son of His Teacher 287
represent a man going home. Kr t;la and Balarama also learned the art of
architecture-how to construct residential buildings. They learned to recog
nize valuable jewels by studying the luster and the quality of their colors.
Then They learned the art of setting jewels with gold and silver. They also
learned how to study soil to find minerals. This study of soil is now a
greatly specialized science, but formerly it was common knowledge even
for the ordinary man. They learned to study herbs and plants and to
extract medicine from the elements. By studying the different species of
plants, They learned how to crossbreed plants and get different types of
fruits. They learned how to train and engage lambs and cocks in fighting for
sporting purposes. They then learned how to teach parrots to speak and
answer the questions of human beings.
They learned practical psychology-how to influence another's mind and
thus induce another to act according to one's own desire. Sometimes this
is called hypnotism. They learned how to wash hair, dye it in different
colors and curl it in different ways. They learned the art of telling what is
written in someone's book without actually seeing it. They learned to tell
what is contained in another's fist. Sometimes children imitate this art,
although not very accurately. One child keeps something within his fist
and asks his friend, "Can you tell what is within? " and the friend gives
some suggestion, although He actually cannot tell. But there is an art by
which one can understand and actually tell what is held within the fist.
Kr t;la and Balarama learned how to speak and understand the languages
of various countries. They learned not only the languages of human beings.
Kr t;la could also speak even with animals and birds. Evidence of this is
found in V ai t;lava literature compiled by the Gosvamis. Then They learned
how to make carriages and airplanes from flowers. It is said in the
Riimiiya[La that after defeating Ravat;!a, Ramacandra was carried from
Larika to Bharatavar a on a plane of flowers called pu pa-ratha. Kr t;la then
learned the art of foretelling events by seeing signs. In a book called
Khaniir vacana, the various types of signs and omens are described. If, when
one is going out, one sees someone with a bucket full of water, that is a
very good sign. But if one sees someone with an empty bucket, it is not a
very good sign. Similarly, if one sees cow's milk along with her calf, it is a
good sign. The result of understanding these signs is that one can foretell
events, and Kr t;la learned the science. Kr t;la also learned the art of com
posing matrka. A matrkii is a crossword section with three letters in a line;
counting any three from any side, it will count nine. The matrkas are of
different kinds and are for different purposes.
Kr t;la learned the art of cutting valuable stones such as diamonds, and
288 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
He learned the art of questioning and answering by immediately composing
poetry within His mind. He learned the science of the action and reaction
of physical combinations and permutations. He learned the art of a
psychiatrist, who can understand the psychic movements of another
person. He learned how to satisfy one's desires. Desires are very difficult
to fulfill; but if one desires something which is unreasonable and can never
be fulfilled, the desire can be subdued and satisfied, and that is an art. By
this art one can also subdue sex impulses when they are aroused, as they
are even in brahmaciin life. By this art one can make even an enemy his
friend or transfer the direct action of a physical element to other things.
Lord Krwa and Balarama, the reservoir of all knowledge of arts and
sciences, exhibited Their perfect understanding when They offered to
serve Their teacher by awarding him anything he desired. This offering by
the student to the teacher or spiritual master is called guru-dak§irzii. It is
essential that a student satisfy the teacher in return for any learning
received, either material or spiritual. When KHI}a and Balarama offered
Their service in this way, the teacher, Sandipani Muni, thought it wise to
ask Them for something extraordinary, something which no common
student could offer. He therefore consulted with his wife about what to
ask from Them. They had already seen the extraordinary potencies of
Kr l}a and Balarama and could understand that the two boys were the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. They decided to ask for the return of
their son, who had drowned in the ocean on the bank of Prabhasak etra.
When Krsna and Balarama heard from Their teacher about the death of
his son on the bank of Prabhasak etra, They immediately started for the
ocean on Their chariot. Reaching the beach, They asked the controlling
deity of the ocean to return the son of Their teacher. The ocean deity
immediately appeared before the Lord and offered Him all respectful
obeisances with great humility.
The Lord said, "Some time back you caused the drowning of the son of
Our teacher. I order you to return him."
The ocean deity replied, "The boy was not actually taken by me, but
was captured by a demon named Paficajana. This great demon generally
remains deep in the water in the shape of a conchshell. The son of Your
teacher might be within the belly of the demon, having been devoured by
him."
On hearing this, K l}a dove deep into the water and caught hold of the
demon Paficajana. He killed him on the spot, but could not find the son
Of His teacher within his belly. Therefore He took the demon's dead body
(in the shape of a conchshell) and returned to His chariot on the beach of
Kr  a Recovers the Son of His Teacher 289
Prahhasa etra. From there He started for Sarhyamani, the residence of
Y amaraj a , the superintendent of death . Accompanied by His elder brother
Balarama, who is also known as Halayudha, Krwa arrived there and blew
on His conchshell.
Hearing the vibration, Y amaraj a appeared and received Sri Kr  a with all
respectful obeisances. Y amaraj a could understand who Krwa and Balarama
were , and therefore he immediately offered his humble service to the Lord.
Kr  a had appeared on the surface of the earth as an ordinary human
being, hut actually Kr  a and Balarama are the Supersoul living within the
heart of every living entity. They are Vi  u Himself, hut were playing just
like ordinary human boys. As Y amaraj a offered his services to the Lord,
Sri Kr !la asked him to return His teacher's son, who had come to him as a
result of his work. "Considering My ruling as supreme," said Kr !la, " you
should immediately return the son of My teacher. "
Yamaraj a returned the hoy t o the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
and Kr !la and Balarama brought him to his father. The brothers asked if
Their teacher had anything more to ask from Them , hut he replied, " My
dear sons, Y ou have done enough for me. I am now completely satisfied.
What further want can there he for a man who has disciples like You? My
dear boys, Y ou can go home now. These glorious acts of Y ours will always
he renowned all over the world. Y ou are above all blessing, yet it is my
duty to bless Y o u . I give Y ou the benediction that whatever Y ou speak
will remain as eternally fresh as th e instruction of the Vedas. Y our
teachings will not only he honored within this universe or in this millen
nium, hut in all places and ages and will remain increasingly new and
important. " Due to this benediction from His teacher, Lord Kr !la's
Bhagavad-gita is ever increasingly fresh and is not only renowned within
this universe , hut in other planets and in other universes also .
Being ordered by Their teacher, Kr !la and Balarama immediately
returned home on Their chariots. They traveled at great speeds like the
wind and made sounds like the crashing of clouds. All the residents of
Mathura, who had not seen Kr !la and Balarama for a long time, were very
pleased to see Them again. They felt j oyful, like a person who has regained
his lost property.
Th us ends the Bhak tivedanta purport of the Forty-fou rth Chapter of
Kr l)a, "Kr ra Recovers the S o n of His Teacher. "
45 I Uddhava Visits Vrndavana•
Nanda Maharaj a returned to Vrndavana without Kr !la and Balarama.
H e was accompanied only by the cowherd boys and men. It was certainly
a very pathetic scene for the go pis, mother Y asoda, Srimati Radharal)i and
all the inhabitants and residents of V rndavana. Many devotees have tried
to make adjustments to Kr !la 's being away from V rndavana because
according to expert opinion, Kr l)a, the original Supreme Personality of
Godhead, never goes even a step out of V rndavana. He always remains
there . The explanation of expert devotees is that Kr l)a was actually not
absent from Vrndavana ; He came back with Nanda Maharaj a as promised.
When H e was going to Mathura on the chariot driven by Akriira and the
gopis were practically blocking the way, Kr l)a assured them that He was
coming back just after finishing His business in Mathura. He told them not
to be overwhelmed, and in this way He pacified them. But when He did
not come back with N anda Maharaja, it appeared that He either cheated
them or could not keep His promise . Expert devotees, however, have
decided that Kr !la was neither a cheater nor a breaker of promises. Kf l)a,
in His original identity, returned with N anda Maharaj a and stayed with the
gopis and mother Y asoda in His bhava expansion. Kr !la and Balarama
remained in Mathura, not in Their original forms, but in Their expansions
as V asudeva and Sarikarsana. The real Krsna and Balarama were in. . . . .
V rndavana in Their b hava manifestation, whereas in Mathura They ap-
peared in the prabhava and vaibhava expansions. This is the expert
opinion of advanced devotees of Kr J)a. But when Nanda Maharaj a was
preparing to return to V rndavana, there was discussion among him, Kr !l 
and Balarama as to how the boys could live in separation from N anda.
Th e conclusion to separate was reached by mutual agreement.
Vasudeva and D evaki happened to be Kr !la and Balarama 's real parents.
They wanted to keep Them now because of the death of Kamsa. While
290
Uddhava Visits V rndavana 29 1
Kamsa was alive, They were kept under the protection of Nanda Maharaja
in V rndavana. N ow, naturally, the father and mother of Kr lla and
Balarama wanted Them to remain with them, specifically for the reforma
tory function of purification, the sacred thread ceremony. They also
wanted to give Them a proper education, for this is the duty of the father.
Another consideration was that all the friends of Kamsa outside Mathura
were planning to attack Mathura. For that reason also Krwa's presence
was required. Kr lla did not .rWant V rndavana to be disturbed by enemies
like D antavakra and Jarasandha. If Krwa were to go to Vrndavana, these
enemies would not only attack Mathura, but would go on to Vrndavana,
and the peaceful inhabitants of V rndavana would be disturbed. Krwa
therefore decided to remain in Mathura, and N anda Maharaja went back
to Vrndavana. Although the inhabitants of V rndavana were feeling separa
tion from Kr l).a, Kr  a was always present with them by His lila, or
pastimes, and this made them ecstatic.
Since Krwa had departed from V rndavana to Mathura, the inhabitants
of Vrndavana, especially mother Yasoda, Nanda Maharaja, Srimati Radha
ral).i, the gopis and the cowherd boys, were simply thinking of Krl?lla at
every step. They were thinking, "Krwa was playing in this way. Krl?l!a was
blowing His flute. Krwa was joking with us, and Krl?l!a was embracing us. "
This is called lilii-smarar-a, and it is the process of association with Kr9pa
most recommended by great devotees; even Lord Caitanya enjoyed lila
smarar-a association of Krl?l!a when He was at Puri. Those who are in the
most exalted position of devotional service and ecstasy can live with Krl?l!a
always by remembering His pastimes. Srila Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakur
has given us a transcendental literature entitled Kr§rw-bhavanamrta, which
is full with Krl?l!a's pastimes. Devotees can remain absorbed in Krl? la
thought by reading such books. Any book of Kr lla lila, even this book,
K[§fl-U, and our Teachin s of Lord Caitan_ya, is adually solace for devotees
who are feeling the separation of Krwa.
That Kr lla and Balarama did not come to Vrndavana can be adjusted as
follows: They did not break Their promise to return to Vrndavana, nor
were They absent, but Their presence was necessary in l\Iathura.
In the meantime, U ddhava, a cousin-brotht r of K r pa, came to see
Kr t.Ja from Dvaraka. He was the son of Vasudeva's brother and was almost
the same age as Krl?t;J.a. His bodily features resembled Kr l!a's almost
exactly. After returning from His teacher's home, Krwa was pleased to see
Uddhava, who happened to be Hi.s dearmost friend. He wanted to send him
to V rndavana with a message to the residents to pacify their deep feeling
of separation.
292 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
As stated in the Bhagavad-gitii, ye yathii miirh prapadyante: Kr !la is
very responsive. He responds in proportion to the devotee's advancement
in devotional service. The gopis were thinking of Kr !la in separation
twenty-four hours a day. Kr !la was also always thinking of the gopis,
mother Y asoda, Nanda Maharaj a and the residents of Vrndavana, although
H e appeared to be away from them . He could understand how they were
transcendentally aggrieved, and so He immediately wanted to send U ddhava
to give them a message of solace.
U ddhava is described as the most exalted personality in the V r !li
dynasty, almost equal to Kr !la. He was a great friend, and on account of
being the direct student of Brhaspati, the teacher and priest of the
heavenly planets, he was very intelligent and sharp in decision. From the
intellectual standpoint, he was highly qualified. Kr !la, being a very loving
friend of u ddhava, wanted to send him to v rndavana just to study the
highly elevated ecstatic devotional service practiced there. Even if one is
highly elevated in material education and is even the disciple of Brhaspati,
he still has to learn from the gop is and the residents of v rndavana how to
love Kr !la to the highest degree. Sending U ddhava to V rndavana with a
message to the residents of V rndavana to pacify them was Kr !la 's special
favor to U ddhava.
Lord Kr !la's name is H ari, which means one who takes away all the
distress from the surrendered souls. Lord C aitanya states that there cannot
be, at any time, a worship as exalted as that realized by the gopis. Being
very anxious about the gopis ' grief, Kr !la talked with U ddhava and
politely requested him to go to V rndavana. Shaking U ddhava's hand with
His own hands, He said, "My dear gentle friend U ddhava, please go imme
diately to Vrndavana and try to pacify My father and mother, N anda
Maharaja and Y asodadev1, and the gopis. They are very much griefstricken,
as if suffering from great ailments. G o and give them a message. I hope
their ailments will be partially relieved. The gopis are always absorbed in
thoughts of Me. They have dedicated body, desire, life and soul to Me. I
am anxious not only for the gopis, but for anyone who sacrifices society ,
friendship, love and personal comforts for Me. It is My duty to protect such
exalted devotees. The gopis are the most dear. They are always thinking of
Me in such a way that they remain overwhelmed and almost dead in
anxiety due to separation from Me. They are keeping alive simply by
thinking that I am returning to them very soon."
Requested by Lord Kr !la, U ddhava immediately left on His chariot and
carried the message to Gokula. He approached V rndavana at sunset, when
the cows were returning home from the pasturing ground. Uddhava and
Uddhava Visits Vrndavana 293
his chariot were covered by the dust raised by the hooves of the cows. He
saw bulls running after cows for mating; other cows, with overladened
milkbags, were running after the calves to fill them with milk. U ddhava
saw that the entire land of V rndavana was filled with white cows and their. .
calves. Cows were running here and there all over Gokula, and he could
hear the sound of milking. Every residential house in Vrndavana was
decorated for the worship of the sun-god and the fire-god and for the
reception of guests, cows, briihmaf!-aS and demigods. Every home was
illuminated with light and incense arranged for sanctification. All over
v rndavana there were nice flower garlands, flying birds and the humming
sound of the bees. The lakes were filled with lotus flowers and with ducks
and swans.
U ddhava entered the house of N anda Maharaja and was received as a
representative of Vasudeva. Nanda Maharaja offered him a place and sat
down with him to ask about messages from Krwa, Balarama and other
family members in Mathura. He could understand that U ddhava was a very
confidential friend of Krwa and therefore must have come with good
messages. "My dear U ddhava, how is my friend Vasudeva enj oying life? He
is now released from the prison of Kari:tsa, and he is now with his friends
and his children, Kr t;J.a and Balarama. So he must be very happy. Tell me
about him and his welfare. We are also very happy 'that Kari:tsa, the most
sinfJil demon, is now killed. He was always envious of the family of the
Y adus, his friends and relatives. Now because of his sinful activities, he is
dead and gone, along with all his brothers.
"Please let us now know whether Krwa is remembering His father and
mother and His friends and companions in Vrndavana. Does He like to
remember His cows, His gopis, His Govardhana Hill, His pasturing ground
in Vrndavana? Or has He forgotten all these now? Is there any possibility
of His coming back to His friends and relatives so that we can again see His
beautiful face with its raised nose and lotus-like eyes? We remember how
He saved us from the forest fire, how He saved us from the great snake
Kaliya in the Yamuna, how He saved us from so many other demons, and
we simply think how much we are obliged to Him for giving us protection
in so many dangerous situations. My dear U ddhava, when we think of
Kr t;J.a's beautiful face and eyes and His different activities here in Vrnda
vana, we become so overwhelmed that all our activities cease. We simply
think of Krwa, how He used to smile and how He looked upon us. When
we go to the banks of the Yam una and other lakes of Vrndavana or near
Govardhana Hill or the pasturing field, we see that the impressions of
Kr t;J.a's footprints are still on the surface of the earth. We remember Him
294 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
playing in those places, because He was constantly visiting them . When
His appearance within our minds becomes manifest, we immediately
become absorbed in thought of Him.
"We think, therefore, that Kr !la and Balarama may be chief demigods
in heaven who have appeared before us like ordinary boys in order to
execute particular duties on earth. This was also foretold by Gargamuni
when making Kr !la 's horoscope. If Krwa were not a great personality,
how could H e have killed Kamsa, who possessed the strength of l 0,000
elephants? Besides Kamsa, there were very strong wrestlers , as well as the
giant elephant, Kuvalayapi a. All these animals and demons were killed by
Him j ust as a lion kills an ordinary animal . H ow wonderful it is that Krwa
took in one hand the big, heavy bow made of three j oined palm trees and
broke it very quickly. H ow wonderful it is that continually for seven days
He held up G ovardhana Hill in one hand. H ow wonderful it is that He has
killed all the demons, like Pralambasura, Dhenukasura, Ari tasura,
Tr!lavarta and Bakasura . They were so strong that even the demigods in
the heavenly planets were afraid of them, but Kr !la killed them as easily
as anything. "
While describing the uncommon activities of Kr !la before U ddhava,
Nanda Maharaja gradually became overwhelmed and could not speak
anymore. As for mother Y asoda , she sat by the side of her husband and
heard the pastimes of Kr !la without speaking. She w as simply crying
incessantly, and milk was pouring from her breasts . When Uddhava saw
Maharaja Nanda and Y asoda so extraordinarily overwhelmed with thoughts
of Kr pa, the Supreme Personali ty of Godhead, and when he experienced
their extraordinary affection for Him, he also became overwhelmed and
began to speak as follows . "My dear mother Y asoda and N anda :Maharaja,
you are most respectable among human beings because no one but you can
meditate in such transcendental ecstasy . "
Both Balarama and Kr pa are the original Personalities of Godhead from
whom the cosmic manifestation is emanating. They are chief among all
personalities . Both of Them are the effective cause of this material creation.
Material nature is conducted by the purusa incarnations, who are all acting
under Krwa and Balarama. By Their partial representation They enter in
the hearts of all living entities. They are the source of all knowledge and
all forgetfulness also. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gitii, Fifteenth
Chapter : "I am' present in everyone's heart, and I cause one to remember
and to forget. I am the original compiler of the Vedanta, and I am the
actual knower of the Vedas. " If, at the time of death, a person can fix his
pure mind upon Kr !1a even for a moment , he becomes eligible to give up
Uddhava Visits V rndavana 295.
this material body and appear in his original spiritual body, just as the sun
rises with all illumination. Passing from his life in this way, he immediately
enters into the spiritual kingdom, Vaiku 1tha. This is the result of Kr  1a
conscious practice.
If we practice Kr§ a consciousness in this present body while we are in
a healthy condition and in good mind, simply by chanting the holy mahii
mantra, Hare Kr  a, we will have every possibility of fixing our mind upon
Kr§ a at the time of death. If that is done, then our life becomes successful
without any doubt. Similarly, if we keep our mind always absorbed in
fruitive activities for material enjoyment, then naturally at the time of
death we shall think of such activities and again be forced to enter into a
material, conditioned body to suffer the threefold miseries of material
existence. Therefore, to remain always absorbed in Kr§ a consciousness
was the standard of the inhabitants of V rndavana, as exhibited by Maharaja
Nanda, Yasoda and the gopis. If we can simply follow their footsteps, even
to a minute proportion, our lives will surely become successful, and we will
enter into the spiritual kingdom, V aiku 1tha.
"My dear mother Yasoda and Nanda Maharaja," Uddhava continued,
"you have thus fixed your minds wholly and solely upon that Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Naraya!la, in His transcendental form, the cause
of impersonal Brahman. The Brahman effulgence is only the bodily ray of
Naraya a, and because you are always absorbed in ecstatic thought of
Krwa and Balarama, what activity remains to be performed by you? I
have brought a message from Krwa to the effect that He will soon come
back to V rndavana and satisfy you both by His personal presence. Kr  a
promised that He would come back to V rndavana after finishing His
business in Mathura. This promise He will surely fulfill. I therefore request
you both, who are the best among all fortunates, to be not aggrieved on
account of Krwa's absence.
"You are already perceiving His presence twenty-four hours a day, and
yet He will come and see you very soon. Actually He is present everywhere
and in everyone's heart, just as fire is present in wood. Since Kr§ a is the
Supersoul, no one is His enemy, no one is His friend, no one is equal to
Him, and no one is lower or higher than Him. Actually He has no father,
mother, brother or relative, nor does He require society, friendship and
love. He does not have a material body; He never appears or takes birth.)
as an ordinary human being. He does not appear in higher or lower
species of life like ordinary living entities, who are forced to take birth
on account of their previous activities. He appears by His internal potency
just to give protection to His devotee. He is never influenced by the modes
296 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
of material nature , but when He appears within this material world, it
seems that He acts like an ordinary living entity under the spell of the
modes of material nature . In fact, He is the overseer of this material
creation and is not affected by the material modes of nature . He creates,
maintains and dissolves the whole cosmic manifestation. We wrongly think
of Krwa and Balarama as ordinary human beings. We are like dizzy men
who see the whole world wheeling around them . The Personality of
Godhead is no one's son ; He is actually everyone's father, mother and
supreme controller. There is no doubt of this. Whatever is being ex
perienced, whatever is already in existence, whatever is not in existence ,
whatever will be in existence in the future, whatever is the smallest and
whatever is the biggest have no separate existence outside the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Everything is resting in Him, but He is out of
touch with everything manifested. "
Nanda and U ddhava thus passed the whole night in discussing Kr !la. In
the morning, the gopis prepared for morning iiriitrika by lighting their
lamps and sprinkling butter mixed with yogurt. After finishing their
mangala-iiriitrika, they engaged themselves in churning butter from yogurt.
While the gopis were thus engaged, the lamps reflected on their ornaments
became still more illuminated . The churning rod , their arms, their earrings,
their bangles, their breasts-everything moved, and the kunk uma powder
gave their faces a saffron luster comparable to the rising sun . While
churning, they also sang the glories of Kr !la. The two sound vibrations
mixed together, ascended to the sky and sanctified the whole atmosphere.
After sunrise the gopis came as usual to offer their respects to N anda
Maharaj a and Yasoda , but when they saw the golden chariot of U ddhava
at the door, they began to inquire among themselves. What was that
chariot, and to whom did it belong? Some of them inquired whether
Akriira, who had taken away Krwa, had again returned. They were
not very pleased with Akriira because, being engaged in the service of
Kamsa, he took Kr pa away to the city of Mathura. All the gopis conj ec
tured that Akriira might have come again to fulfill another cruel plan. But
they thought, "We are now dead bodies without our supreme master,
Krwa. What furthe-r act can he perpetrate on these dead bodies?" While
they were talking in this way, U ddhava finished his morning ablutions,
prayers and chanting and came before them.
Thus ends the Bhak tivedan ta purport of the Forty-fifth Chapter of
Kr !la, "Uddhava Visits Vrndiivana. "
The elephant moved before Krwa like inevitable death . (p. 271 )

"Their blood began to flow just like the waves of a river." (p. 330)

"Bumblebee, you are the unreliable servant of an unreliable master. " (p. 29 9 )
"S ome time back you caused the drowning of the son of Our teacher . I order you to
return him . " (p. 288 )
"Full of feminine bashfulness, Kubja stood gracefully before Kr  a." (p. 3 1 5)
" Kr  a and Balarama jumped from the top of the mountain. " ( p . 348)
\
) ,
46 I Delivery o f the Message
of Kr  a to the Gopis
When the gopis saw U ddhava, they observed that his features almost
exactly resembled the features of Kr  a, and they could understand that
he was a great devotee of Kr  a 's. His hands were very long, and his arms
were just like the petals of the lotus flower. He was dressed in yellow
colored garments and wore a garland of lotus flowers. His face was very
beautiful. Having achieved the liberation of siirilpya and having the same
bodily features as the L ord, U ddhava looked almost like Krwa. In Krwa's
absence, the gopis had been coming dutifully to visit mother Yasoda's
house early in the morning. They knew that Nanda Maharaj a and mother
Y asoda were always griefstricken, and they had made it their first duty to
come and pay their respects to the most exalted elderly personalities of
V rndavana. Seeing the friends of Kr  a, Nanda and Yasoda wou ld remem
ber Kr  a Himself and be satisfied, and the gopis also would be pleased by
seeing N anda and Y asoda.
When the gopis saw that U ddhava was representing Krwa even in his
bodily features, they thought that he must be a soul completely surrendered
unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They began to contemplate,
"Who is this boy who looks just like Kr  a? H e has the same eyes like lotus
petals, the same raised nose and beautiful face, and he is smiling in the
same way. In all respects he is resembling Krwa, Syamasundara, the
beautiful dark boy. He is even dressed exactly like Kr  a. Where has this
boy come from? Who is the fortunate girl who has him f6r her husband?"
Thus they talked among themselves. They were very anxious to know
about him, and because they were simply unsophisticated village girls, they
surrounded U ddhava.
When the gopis understood that Uddhava had a m essage from Kr  a,
they became very happy and called him to a secluded place to sit down.
They wanted to talk with him very freely and did not want to be
2 9 7
298 Kr  a, the Supre me Pe rsonality of G odhead
embarrassed before unknown persons. They began to welcome him with
polite words , in great submissiveness. "We know that you are a most confi
dential associate of Kr !la and that He has therefore sent you to V rndavana
to give solace to His father and mother. We can understand that family
affection is very strong. Even great sages who have taken to the renounced
order of life cannot give up family members. Kr !la has therefore sent
you to His father and mother ; otherwise He has no further business in
V rndavana. He is now in town. What does He have to know about V rnda
vana Village or the cows'r-'pasturing grounds? These things are not at all
useful for Kr !la because He is now a man in the city.
"Surely He has nothing to do with persons who do not happen to be His
family members. Why should one bother about those who are outside the
family, especially and specifically those who are attached as the wives of
others. Kr !la is interested in them as long as there is a need of gratification,
like the bumblebees who have interest in the flowers as long as they want
to take the honey out of them. It is very natural and psychological that a
prostitute does not care for her paramour as soon as he loses his money.
Similarly, when the citizens find that a government is incapable of giving
them full protection, they leave the country. A student, after finishing his
education, gives up his relationship with the teacher and the school. A rich
man, after taking his reward from his worshiper, gives him u p . When the
fruit season is over, the birds are no longer interested in the tree. Just after
eating in the house of a lord, the guest gives up his relationship with the
host. After a forest fire , when there is a scarcity of green grass, the deer
and other animals give up the forest. And so a man, after enj oying his girl
friend, gives up his connection with her . " In this way, all the gopis began
to indirectly accuse Kr !la by citing so many similes.
Uddhava understood that the gopis of V rndavana were all simply ab
sorbed in the thought of Kr !la and His childhood activities. While talking
about Kr  1a with Uddhava , they forgot all about their household business.
They even forgot about themselves as their interest in Krwa increased more
and more.
One of the gopis, namely Srimati Radhara!li, was so much absorbed in
thoughts of Kr !la by dint of Her personal touch with Him that She
actually began to talk with a bumblebee which was 'flying there and trying
to touch Her lotus feet. While another gopi was talking with Kr !la's
messenger U ddhava, Srimati Radhara!li took that bumblebee to be a
·messenger from Kr !la and began to talk with it as follows. "Bumblebee,
you are accustomed to drinking honey from the flowers , and therefore you
have preferred to be a messenger of Kr !la, who is of the same nature as
Delivery of the Message of Kf J)a to the Gopis 299
you. I have seen on your moustaches the red powder of kunkuma, which
was smeared on the flower garland of Kr !la while He was pressing the
breast of some other girl who is My competitor. Y ou are feeling very
proud by touching that flower, and your moustaches have become reddish.
Y ou have come here carrying a message for Me. · y ou are anxious to touch
My feet. But my dear bumblebee, let me warn you-don't touch M e ! I
don't want any messages from your unreliable master. Y ou are the unre
liable servant of an unreliable master. " It may be that Srimati Radhara!li
purposely addressed that bumblebee sarcastically in order to criticize the
messenger Uddhava. Indirectly, Srimati Radhara!li saw Uddhava as not
only resembling Kr !la's bodily features but as being equal to Kr !la· In this
way She indicated that U ddhava was as unreliable as Kr !la Himself.
Srimati Radhara!li wanted to give specific reasons why She was dissatisfied
with Kr !la and His messengers.
She addressed the bumblebee, " Y our master Kr !la is exactly of your
quality. Y ou sit down on a flower, and after taking a little honey you
immediately fly away and sit in another flower and taste. Y ou 're j ust like
your master Kr !la· He gave us the chance of tasting the touch of His lips
and then left altogether. I know also that the goddess of fortune, Lak mi,
who is always in the midst of the lotus flower, is constantly' engaged in
Kr !la's service. But I do not know why she has become so captivated by
Kr !la. She is attached to Him , although she knows His actual character.
As far as we are concerned, we are more intelligent than that goddess of
fortune . We are not going to be cheated anymore by Kr !la or His mes
sengers. "
According t o expert opinion, L ak mi, the goddess o f fortune i s a sub
ordinate expansion of Srimati Radhara!li· As Kr !la has numerous expan
sions of Vi !lu-murtis, so His pleasure potency, Radhara!li, also has
innumerable expansions of goddesses of fortune . Therefore the goddess
of fortune, L ak miji, is always anxious to be elevated to the position of
the gopis .
Sri'mati Radhara!li continued : " Y ou foolish bumblebee, you are trying
to satisfy Me and get a reward by singing the glories of Kr !la, but it is a
useless attempt. We are bereft of all our possessions. We are away from our
homes and families. We know very well abouf Kr !la· We know even more
than you. So whatever you make up about Him will be old stories to us.
Kr !la is now in the city and is better known as the friend of Arjuna. He
now has many new girl friends, and they are no doubt very happy in
association with Him. Because the lusty burning sensation of their
breasts has been satisfied by Kr !la, they are now happy. If you go there
300 Kr  a , the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and glorify Krwa, they may be pleased to reward you . You are just trying
to pacify Me by your behavior as a flatterer, and therefore you have put
your head under My feet. But I know the trick which you are trying to
play. I know that you are a messenger coming from a great trickster, Kr !J.a.
Therefore please leave me.
"I can understand that you are very expert in reuniting two opposing
parties, but at the same time you must know that I cannot place My
reliance upon you , nor upon your master Kr !la· We left our families,
husbands, children and relatives only for Kr !J.a, and yet He did not feel
any obligation in exchange. He has left us for lost. D o you think we can
place our faith in Him again? We know that Krwa cannot be long without
the association of young women. That is His nature. He is finding
difficulty in Mathura because He is no longer in the village among
innocent cowherd girls. He is in the aristocratic society and must be feeling
difficulty in making friendships with the young girls. Perhaps you have
come here to canvass again or to take us there. But why should Kr !la
expect us to return there? He is greatly qualified to entice all other girls,
not only in V rndavana or Mathura, but all over the universe. His wonder
fully enchanting smile is so attractive and the movement of His eyebrows
so beautiful that He can call for any woman from the heavenly , middle or
plutonic planets. Maha-Lak mi, the greatest of all goddesses of fortune,
also hankers to render Him some service. In comparison to all these women
of the universe , what are we? We are very insignificant.
"Kr pa advertises Himself as very magnanimous , and He is praised by
great saints. His qualifications could be perfectly utilized if He would only
show us mercy because we are downtrodden and neglected by Him.
Y ou poor messenger, you are only a less intelligent servant. Y ou do not
know much about Kr !J.a, how ungrateful and hardhearted He has been, not
only in this life, but in His previous lives also. We have all heard this from
our grandmother, Paur!J.amasi. She has informed us that Kr !la was born in
a k§atriya family previous to this birth and was known as Ramacandra. In
that birth, instead of killing V ali, an enemy of His friend, in the manner
of a k§atriya, He killed him just like a hunter. A hunter , takes a secure
hiding place and then kills an animal without facing it. So Lord Rama
candra, as a k§atriya, should have fought with · Vali face to face, but
instigated by His friend, He killed him from behind a tree. Thus He
deviated from the religious principles of a k§atriya. Also , He was so
attracted by the beauty of Sita that He converted Siirpa!takha, the sister
of Rava!J.a, into an ugly woman by cutting off her nose and ears.
Siirpa!J.akha proposed an intimate relationship with Him, and as a k§atriya,
Delivery of the Message of Kr  a to the Gopis 30 1
He should have satisfied her. But He was so selfish that H e could not forget
Sitadevi and converted Siirpa akha into an ugly woman. Before that birth
as a k§atriya , He took His birth as a b rah mal)a boy known as Vamanadeva
and asked charity from Bali Maharaja. Bali Maharaja was so magnanimous
that he gave Him whatever he had, yet Kr  a as V amanadeva ungratefully
arrested him just like a crow and pushed him down to the Patala kingdom.
We know all about Krwa and how ungrateful He is. But here is the
difficulty : in spite of His being so cruel and hardhearted, it is very dif
ficult for us to give up talking about Him . Not only are we unable to give
up this talk, but great sages and saintly persons are also engaged in talking
about · Him. We gopis of Vrndavana do not want to make anymore
friendships with this blackish boy, but we do not know how we shall be
able to give up remembering and talking about His activities. "
Since Kr pa i s absolute , His so -called unkind activities are as relishable
as His kind activities. Saintly persons and great devotees like the gopis
cannot give up Kr  a in 'any circumstances. Lord C aitanya therefore
prayed, " Krwa, You are free and independent in all respects. You can
either embrace me or crush me under Y our feet-whatever Y ou like. Y ou
may make me brokenhearted by not letting me see You throughout my
whole life , but You are my only object of love . "
" I n m y opinion," Srimati Radhara i continued, " one should n o t hear
about Kr  a, because as soon as a drop of the nectar of His transcendental
activities is poured into the ear , one immediately rises above the platform
of duality, attraction and rejection. Being completely freed from the
attraction of material attachment, one gives up the attachment for this
material world, family, home , wife , children and everything which is
materially dear to every person. Being dispossessed of all material acquisi
tion, one makes his relatives and himself unhappy. Then he wanders in
search of Kr  a, either as a human being or in other species of life , even
as a bird. It is very difficult to actually understand Kr  a, His name , His
quality, His form, His pastimes, His paraphernalia and His entourage . "
Srimati Radhara i continued t o speak t o the black messenger of Krwa.
"Please do not talk anymore about Krwa. It is better to talk about some
thing else. We are already doomed, like the black-spotted she-deer in the
forest who are enchanted by the sweet musical vibration of the hunter. In
the same way, we have been enchanted by the sweet words of Kr  a, and
again and again we are thinking of the rays of the nails of His toes. We are
becoming more and more lustful for His association ; therefore , I request
you not to talk of Kr  a anymore. "
This talk o f Radhara 1i with the bumblebee messenger and Her accusing
302 Kr !'a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Krwa, and, at the same time, Her inability to give up talking about Him,
are symptoms of the topmost transcendental ecstasy, called mahiibhiiva.
The ecstatic mahiibhiiva manifestation is possible only in the persons of
Radhara i and Her associates. Great iictiryas like Srila Riipa Gosvami and
Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakur have analyzed these mahiibhiiva speeches of
Srimati Radharani, and they have described the different sentiments such
as udghurrii, bewilderment, and jalpapratijalpa, talking in different ways.
In Radhara i is found the science of ujjala, or the brightest jewel or love
of God. While Radhara i was talking with the bee and the bee was flying
hither and thither, it all of a sudden disappeared from Her sight. She was
in full mourning due to separation from Krwa and was feeling ecstasy by
talking with the bee. But as soon as the bee disappeared, She became
almost mad, thinking that the messenger-bee might have returned to Krwa
to inform Him all about Her talking against Him. "Krwa must have been
very sorry to hear it," She thought. In this way She was very much
overwhelmed with another type of ecstasy.
In the meantime, the bee, flying hither and thither, appeared before
Her again. She thought, "Krwa is still kind to Me. In spite of the mes
senger carrying disruptive messages, He is so kind that He has again sent
the bee to take Me to Him." Srimati Radhara i was very careful this time
not to say anything against Krwa. "My dear friend, I welcome you," she
said. " Krwa is so kind that He has again sent you. Kr  a is so kind and
affectionate to Me that He has sent you back, fortunately, in spite of your
carrying My message against Him. My dear friend, you can ask from Me
whatever you want. I shall give you anything because you are so kind upon
Me. You have come to take Me to Krsna because He is not able to come
here. He is surrounded by new girl friends in Mathura. But you are a tiny
creature. How can you take Me there? How will you be able to help Me in
meeting Krwa while He is taking rest there along with the goddess of
fortune and embracing her to His chest? Never mind. Let us forget all
these things about My going there or sending you. Please let Me know
how Kr  a is faring in Mathura. Tell Me if He still remembers His foster
father, Nanda Maharaja, His affectionate mother, Yasoda, His cowherd
friends and His poor friends like us, the gopis. I am sure that He must
sometimes sing about us. We served Him just like maidservants, without
any payment. Is there any possibility that Kr  a will again come back and
place His arms around us? His limbs are always fragrant with the aguru
scent. Please put all these inquiries to Krwa. "
Uddhava was standing near, and he heard Radhara i talking in this way,
as if She had become almost mad after Kr  a. He was exceedingly surprised
Delivery of the Message of Kr J;la to the Gopis 303
at how the gopis were accustomed to think of Kr !la constantly in that
topmost ecstasy of mahiibhiiva love. He had brought a message in writing
from Kr J}a, and now he wanted to present it before the gopis, just to
pacify them. He said, "My dear gopis, your mission of human life is now
successful. You are all wonderful devotees of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; therefore you are eligible to be worshiped by all kinds of people.
You are worshipable throughout the three worlds because your minds are
wonderfully absorbed in the thought of Vasudeva, Kr !la. He is the goal
of all kinds of pious activities and ritualistic performances, such as giving
in charity, rigidly following the austerity of vows, undergoing severe
penances and igniting the fire of sacrifice. He is the purpose behind the
chanting of different mantras, the reading of the Vedas, controlling the
senses and concentrating the mind in meditation. These are some of the
many different processes for self-realization and attainment of perfection
of life. But actually they are only meant for realizing Kr !la and dove
tailing onesdf in the transcendental loving service of the Supreme Per
sonality of Godhead. This is the last instruction of Bhagavad-gitii also;
although there are descriptions of different kinds of processes of self
realization, at the end Krwa recommended one should give up everything
and simply surrender unto Him. All other processes are meant for teaching
one how to surrender ultimately unto the lotus feet of Krwa. The
Bhagavad-gitii also says that this surrendering process is completed by a
sincere person executing the processes of self-realization in wisdom and
austerity after many births."
Since the perfection of such austerity was completely manifested in the
life of the gopis, Uddhava was fully satisfied upon seeing their transcen
dental position. He continued to say: "My dear gopis, the mentality which
you have developed in relationship with Kr va is very, very difficult to
attain, even for great sages and saintly persons. You have attained the
highest perfectional stage of life. It is a great boon for you that you have
fixed your mind upon Kr !la and have decided to have Kr !la only, giving
up your family, home, relatives, husbands and children for the sake of the
Supreme Personality. Because your mind is now fully absorbed in Kfi?J}a,
the Supreme Soul, universal love has automatically developed in you. I
think myself very fortunate that I have been favored, by your grace, to see
you in this situation."
When U ddhava said that he had a message from Krwa, the gopis were
more interested in hearing the message than in hearing about their exalted
position. They did not very much like being praised for their high position.
They showed their anxiety to hear the message which U ddhava had
304 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
brought from Kr !J.a. Uddhava said, "My dear gopis, I am especially deputed
to carry this message to you, who are such great and gentle devotees.
Kr !la has specifically sent me to you because I am His most confidential
servitor."
The written message which U ddhava brought from Kr !la was not
delivered to the gopis by U ddhava, but he personally read it before them.
The message was very gravely written, so that not only the gopis, but all
empiric philosophers might understand how pure love of God is intrinsically
integrated with all the different energies of the Supreme Lord. From Vedic
information it is understood that the Supreme Lord has multi-energies,
parasya saktir vividhaiva smyate. Also, the gopis were such intimate
personal friends of Krwa that while He was writing·the message for them,
He was much moved and could not write distinctly. Uddhava, as the student
of Brhaspati, had very sharp intelligence, so instead of handing over the
written message, he thought it wise to read it personally and explain it to
them.
Uddhava continued: "These are the words from the Personality of
Godhead. •My dear gopis, My dear friends, please know that separation
between ourselves is impossible at any time, at any place or. under any
circumstances, because I am all-pervading.'"
This all-pervasiveness of Kr  1a is explained in the Bhagavad-gztii, both
in the Ninth and Seventh Chapters. Kr !la is all-pervasive in His impersonal
feature; everything is resting in Him, but He is not personally present
everywhere. In the Seventh Chapter also, it is stated that the five gross
elements, earth, water, fire, air and sky, and the three subtle elements,
mind, intelligence, and ego, are all His inferior energies. But there
is another, superior energy, which is called the living entity. The
living entities are also directly part and parcel of Kr  1a. Therefore Kr9 a
is the source of both the material and spiritual energies. He is always
intermingled with everything as cause and effect. Not only the gopis, but
all living entities are always inseparably connected with Kr !la in all
circumstances. The gopis, however, are perfectly and thoroughly in
cooperation in their relationship with Kr !J.a, whereas the living entities
under the spell of maya are forgetful of Kr !J.a. They think themselves as
separate identities having no connection with Kr !J.a.
Love of Kr va, or Kr va consciousness, is therefore the perfectional
stage of real knowledge in understanding things as they are. Our minds can
never be vacant. The mind is constantly occupied with some kind of
thought, and the subject matter of such thought cannot be outside the
eight elements of Kr9 a's energy. One who knows this philosophical aspect
Delivery of the Message of Kr  a to the Gopis 305
of all thoughts is actually a wise man, and he surrenders unto Kr§pa. The
gopis are the typical example of this perfectional stage of knowledge. They
are not simple mental speculators. Their minds are always in Kr§ a. The
mind is nothing but the energy of Kr§ a. Actually, any person who can
think, feel, act and will cannot be separated from Kr§ a. But the stage in
which he can understand his eternal realtionship is called Krwa conscious
ness. The diseased condition in which he cannot understand his eternal
relationship with Kf§t;Ia is the contaminated stage, or miiyii. Since the
gopis are on the platform of pure transcendental knowledge, their minds
are always filled with Krwa consciousness. For example, as there is no
separation between fire and air, so there is no separation between Kf§t;Ia
and the living entities. When the living entities forget Kf§t;Ia, they are not
in their normal condition. As for the gopis, because they are always
thinking of Kp;; a they are on the absolute stage of perfection in know
ledge. The so-called empiric philosophers sometimes think that the path of
bhakti is meant for the less intelligent, but unless the so-called man of
knowledge comes to the platform of bhakti, his knowledge is certainly
impure and imperfect. Actually, the stage of perfecting one's eternal
relationship with Krf? a is love in separation. But that is also illusory
because there is no separation. The gopis were never separated from
Krf?pa. Even from the philosophical point of view, there was no separation.
The cosmic manifestation is also not separate from Kr§ a. " Nothing is
separate from Me; the whole cosmic manifestation is resting on Me and is
not separate from Me. Before the creation, I was existing." This is con
firmed in the Vedic literature: before creation, there was only N araya a.
There were no Brahma and no Siva as assistants. The whole cosmic
manifestation is manipulated by the three modes of material nature.
Brahma is the incarnation of the quality of passion. It is said that Brahma
created this universe, but Brahma is the secondary creator; the original
creator is Naraya a. This is also confirmed by Sankaracarya: niiriiyar-a[l,
paro 'vyak tiit. Naraya a is transcendental, beyond this cosmic creation.
Kf§p.a creates, maintains, and annihilates the whole cosmic manifesta
tion by expanding Himself in different incarnations. Everything is Krwa,
and everything is depending on Kr§t;Ia, but He is not perceived in the
material energy. Material energy is called miiyii, or illusion. In the spiritual
energy, however, Kr9 a is perceived at every step, in all circumstances.
This perfectional stage of understanding is present in the gopis. As Kf§t;Ia
is always aloof from the cosmic manifestation, although it is completely
dependent on Him, so a living entity is also completely aloof from his
material conditional life. The material body has developed on the basis of
306 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
spiritual existence. In the Bhagavad-gita the whole cosmic manifestation is
accepted as the mother of the living entities, and Kf§!la is the father. As
the father impregnates the mother by injecting the living entity within the
womb, so all the living entities are injected by Kf§!la in the womb of the
material nature. They come out in different bodies according to their
different fruitive activities. In all circumstances, the living entity is aloof
from this material conditional life.
If we simply study our own bodies, we can understand how a living
entity is always aloof from this bodily encagement. Every action of the
body is taking place by the interaction of the three modes of material
nature. We can see at every moment many changes taking place in bodies,
but the spirit soul is aloof from all changes. One can neither create nor
annihilate nor interfere with the actions of material nature. The living
entity is therefore entrapped by the material body and is conditioned in
three stages, namely while awake, asleep and unconscious. The mind is
acting through all the three conditions of life ; the living entity in his
sleeping or dreaming condition sees something as real, and in his fl-Wake
condition he sees the same thing as unreal. It is concluded, therefore, that
under certain circumstances he accepts something as real, and under other
circumstances he accepts the very same thing as unreal. These matters are
the subject matter of study for the empiric philosopher or the siinkhya
yogi. In order to come to the right conclusion, siinkhya-yogis undergo
severe austerities and penances. They practice control of the senses and
renunciation.
All these different ways of determining the ultimate goal of life are
compared to rivers. Kr§ la is the ocean. As the rivers flow down toward the
ocean, all attempts for knowledge flow toward Kf§!J.a. After many, many
births of endeavor, when one actually comes to Kf§!J.a, he attains the
perfectional stage. Kr !la says in the Bhagavad-gitii: All are pursuing the
path of realizing Me, but those who have adopted courses without any
bhakti find their endeavor very troublesome." Kleso'dhikataras te§iim:
Kf§!la cannot be understood unless one comes to the point of bhakti.
Three paths are enunciated in the Gitii: karma-yoga, jfiJina-yoga and
bhakti-yoga. Those who are too addicted to fruitive activities are advised
to perform actions which will bring them to bhak ti. Those who are ad
dicted to the frustration of empiric philosophy are also advised to realize
bhakti. Karma-yoga is different from ordinary karma, and jniina-yoga is
different from jiiiina. Ultimately, as stated by the Lord in the Bhagavad
gitii, bhaktyii miim abhijiiniiti: only through execution of devotional
service can one understand Kf§!J.a. The perfectional stage of devotional
Delivering the Message of Kr  a to the Gopis 307
service was achieved by the gopis because they did not care to know
anything but Kr  a. It is confirmed in the Vedas, yasmin eva vijfiate sar
vam eva vijfiiitam bhavanti. This means that simply by knowing Kr  1a all
other knowledge is automatically acquired.
Kr  a continued: "Transcendental knowledge of the Absolute is no
longer necessary for you. You were accustomed to love Me from the very
beginning of your lives." Knowledge of the Absolute Truth is specifically
required for persons who want liberation from material existence. But one
who has attained love for Kr  a is already on the platform of liberation. As
stated in the Bhagavad-gita, anyone engaged in unalloyed devotional service
is to be considered situated on the transcendental platform of liberation.
The gopis were not actually feeling any pangs of material existence, but
they were feeling the separation of Krwa. Kr  a therefore said, "My dear
gopis, in order to increase your superexcellent love for Me, I have purposely
separated Myself from you. I have done this so that you may be in constant
meditation on Me."
The gopis are in the perfectional stage of meditation. The yogis are
generally more fond of meditation than the execution of devotional ser
vice to the Lord, but they do not know  hat the perfectional stage of
devotion is the attainment of the perfection of the yoga system. This
constant meditation on Kr pa by the gopis is confirmed in the Bhagavad
gitii to be the topmost yoga. Kr  a knew very well the psychology of
women. When a woman's beloved is away, she thinks of him meditatively,
and he is present before her. Kr  a wanted to teach through the behavior
of the gopis. One who is constantly in trance like the gopis surely attains
the lotus feet of Kr  a.
Lord Caitanya taught people in general the method of vipralambha,
which is the method of rendering service unto the Supreme Personality of
Godhead in the feeling of separation. The six Gosvamis also taught worship
of Krwa in •the feeling of the gopis in separation. The prayers of Srinivasa
Acarya about the Gosvamis explain these matters very clearly. Srinivasa
Acarya said that the Gosvamis were always absorbed in the ocean of
transcendental feelings in the mood of the gopis. When they lived .in
Vrndavana they were searching for Kr pa, crying, "Where is Kr pa? Where
are the gopis ? Where are You, Srimati Radharapi?" They never said, "We
have now seen Radha and Kr pa, and therefore our mission is fulfilled."
Their mission remained always unfulfilled ; they never met Radha and
Kr pa. At the time of the rasa dance, those gopis who could not j oin the
riisa-lilii with Kr  a gave up their bodies simply by thinking of Him.
Absorption in Kr  a consciousness by feeling separation is thus the
308 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
quickest method for attainment of the lotus feet of Kf J).a. By the personal
statement of Kr !la , the gopis were convinced about the strength of feelings
of separation. They were actually experiencing the supernatural method of
Kr pa worship and were much relieved and happy to understand it.
They began to speak as follows : "We have heard that King Kamsa, who
was always a source of trouble for the Yadu dynasty, has now been killed.
This is good news for us. We hope, therefore, that the members of the
Y adu dynasty are very happy in the association of Kr pa, who can fulfill
all the desires of His devotees. My dear Uddhava, kindly let us know
whether Krwa sometimes thinks of us while in the midst of highly
enlightened society girls in Mathur a. We know that the women and girls
in Mathura are not village women. They are enlightened and beautiful.
Their bashful smiling glances and other feminine features must be very
pleasing to Kr J).a. We know very well that Kr l).a is always fond of the
behavior of beautiful women. It seems , therefore, that He has been en
trapped by the women of Mathura. My dear Uddhava, will you kindly let
us know if Kr l).a sometimes remembers us while He is in the midst of
other women?"
Another gopi inquired : " D oes He remember that night in the midst o f
k umadini flowers a n d moonlight, when V rndavana became exceedingly
beautiful? Kr pa was dancing with us, and the atmosphere was surcharged
with the sound of foot bells. We exchanged pleasing conversation then.
D oes He remember that particular night? We remember that night, and we
feel separation. Separation from Krwa makes us agitated, as if there were
fire in our bodies. He proposed to come back to V rndavana to extinguish
the fire, just as a cloud appears in the sky to extinguish the forest fire by
its downpour. "
Another gopi said, "Kr pa has killed His enemy, and He has victoriously
achieved the kingdom of Kamsa. Maybe He is married with a king's
daughter by this time and living very happily among His kinsmen and
friends. Therefore, why should He come to this village of Vrndavana? "
Another gopi said, "Kf l).a i s the Supreme Personality o f Godhead, the
husband of the goddess of fortune, and He is self-sufficient . He has no
business either with us, the girls in the v rndavana forest, or with the city
girls in Mathura. He is the great Supersoul ; He has nothing to do with any
of us, either here or there. "
Another gop i said, "It is a n unreasonable hope for u s t o expect Kr pa to
come back to Vrndavana . We should try instead to be happy in disappoint
ment. Even Pingala, the great prostitute , said that disappointment' is the
greatest pleasure. We all know these things, hut it is very difficult for us to
Delivering the Message of Kr tla to the Gopis 309
give up the expectation of Krwa's coming back again. Who can forget a
solitary conversation with Kr  a, on whose breast the goddess of fortune
always remains, in spite of Krwa's not desiring her? My dear Uddhava,
Vrndavana is the land of rivers, forests and cows. Here the vibration of the
fl te is heard, and Krwa, along with His elder brother, Sri Balarama,
enj oyed the atmosphere in our company. Thus the environment of Vrnda
vana is constantly reminding us of Kr  a and Balarama. The impression of
His footprints is on the land of Vrndavana, which is the residential place of
the goddess of fortune, but such signs cannot help us to get Krwa."
The gopis further expressed that Vrndavana was still full of all opulence
and good fortune; there was no scarcity or want in Vrndavana as far as
material necessities were concerned, but in spite of such opulence they
could not forget Kg; a and Balarama.
"We are constantly remembering various attractive features of beautiful
Kr  a, His walking, His smiling and His joking words. We have all become
lost by the dealings of Krwa, and it is impossible for us to forget Him. We
are always praying for Him, exclaiming, 'Dear Lord, dear husband of the
goddess of fortune, dear Lord of Vrndavana and deliverer of the distressed
devotees! We are now fallen and merged into an ocean of distress. Please,
therefore, come back again to v rndavana and deliver us from this pitiable
condition."
Uddhava miQ.utely studied the transcendental abnormal condition of the
gopis in their separation from Krwa, and he thought it wise to repeat all
the pastimes of Sri Krwa over and over again. Materialistic persons are
always in a burning condition on account of the blazing fire of material
miseries. The gopis also were burning in a transcendental blazing fire due
to separation from Krwa. The blazing fire which was exasperating the
gopis, however, is different from the fire of the material world. The gopis
constantly want the association of Kr  a, whereas the materialistic person
wants the advantage of material comforts.
It is stated by Visvanatha Cakravarti Thakur that Kr  a saved the cow
herd boys from the blazing forest fire within a second, while their eyes
were closed. Similarly, Uddhava advised the gopis that they could be saved
from the fire of separation by closing their eyes and meditating on the acti
vities of Kr  a from the very beginning of their association with Him. From
the outside, the gopis could visualize all the pastimes of Kr !la by hearing
the descriptions of U ddhava, and from inside they could remember those
pastimes. From the instruction of Uddhava, the gopis could understand
that Kr  a was not separate from them. As they were constantly thinking
of Kr  a, Kr  a was also thinking of them constantly while at Mathura.
3 10 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Uddhava's messages and instructions saved the gopis from immediate
death, and the gopis acknowledged the benediction from U ddhava.
U ddhava practically acted as the preceptor spiritual master of the gopis,
and they in return worshiped him as they would worship Kr  a. It is
recommended in authoritative scriptures that the spiritual master should
be worshiped on the level of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, because
of his being His very confidential servitor, and it is accepted by great
authorities that the spiritual master is the external manifestation of Kr !la.
The gopis were relieved from their transcendental burning conditio_n by
realizing that Kr !la was with them. Internally, they remembered His
association within their hearts, and externally U ddhava helped them to
appreciate Krwa by conclusive instructions.
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is described in the scriptures as
adhok§aja, which indicates that He is beyond the perception of all
material senses. Although He is beyond the perception of material senses,
He is present in everyone's heart. At the same time, He is present every
where by His all-pervasive feature of Brahman. All three transcendental
features of the Absolute Truth (Bhagaviin the Personality of Godhead,
Paramiitmii the localized Supersoul, and the all-pervasive Brahman) can be
realized simply by studying the condition of the gopis in their meeting
with Uddhava, as described by the Srimad-Bhiigavatam.
It is said by Srinivasa Acarya that the six Gosvamis were always merged
in thoughts of the activities of the gopis. Caitanya Mahaprabhu has also
·recommended the gopis ' method of worship of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead as superexcellent. Srila Sukadeva Gosvamihas also recommended
that anyone who hears from the right source about the dealings of the
gopis with Kr !la and who follows the instructions will be elevated to the
topmost position of devotional service and will be able to give up the lust
of material enjoyment.
All the gopis were solaced by the instruction of Uddhava, and they
requested him to stay in Vrndavana for a few days more. Uddhava agreed
to their proposal and stayed with them not only for a few days, but for a
few months. He always kept them engaged in thinking of the transcendental
message of Kr  a and His pastimes, and the gopis were feeling as if they
were experiencing direct association with Kr !la. While U ddhava remained
in V rndavana, the inhabitants enj oyed his association. As they discussed
the activities of Kr pa, the days passed just like moments. Vrndavana's
natural atmosphere, with the presence of the River Yamuna, its nice
orchards of trees decorated with various fruits, Govardhana Hill, caves,
blooming flowers-all combined to inspire U ddhava to narrate Kr !la's
Delivering the Message of Kr l}a to the Gopis 3 1 1
pastimes. The inhabitants enjoyed Uddhava's association in the same way
as they enj oyed the association of Kr Fa·
Uddhava was attracted by the attitude of the gopis because they were
completely attached to Kr Fa, and U ddhava was inspired by the gopis '
anxiety for Krwa. He began to offer them his respectful obeisances and
composed songs in praise of their transcendental qualities as follows:
"Among all the living entities who have accepted the human form of life,
the gopis are superexcellently successful in their mission. Their thought is
thoroughly absorbed in the lotus feet of KnFa. Great sages and saintly
persons are also trying to be absorbed in meditation upon the lotus feet of
Kr  1a, who is Mukunda Himself, the giver of liberation, hut the gopis,
having lovingly accepted the Lord, are automatically accustomed to this
habit. They do not depend on any yogic practice. The conclusion is that
one who has attained the gopis ' condition of life does not have to take
birth as Lord Brahma or be born in a b rahmara family or be initiated as a
brahmana. "
Sri Uddhava confirmed the statement of Bhagavad-gitii spoken by Lord
Kr  1a ; one who takes shelter of Him for the right purpose, be he a sudra
or lower, will attain the highest goal of life. The gopis have set the standard
of devotion for the whole world. By following in the footsteps of the gopis
by constantly thinking of J5rwa, one can attain the highest perfectional
stage of spiritual life. The gopis were not born of any highly cultured fami
ly; they were born of cowherd men, and yet they developed the highest
love of Kr  1a. For self-realization or God realization there is no need to
take birth in a high family. The only thing needed is ecstatic development
of love of God. In achieving perfection in Kg; 1a consciousness, no other
qualification is required than to he constantly engaged in the loving service
of Krwa. Kr  1a is the supreme nectar, the reservoir of all pleasure. The
effect of taking up Kr Fa consciousness is just like that of drinking nectar;
with or without one's knowledge, it will act. The active principle of Kr Fa
consciousness will manifest itself everywhere; it does not matter how and
where one has taken his birth. Krwa will bestow His benediction upon
anyone who takes to Krwa consciousness, without any doubt. The
supreme benediction attained by the gopis in spite of their being horn in
the family of cowherd men was never attained even by the goddess of
fortune herself, and certainly not by the denizens of heaven, though their
bodily forms are like lotuses. The gopis are so fortunate that during rasa
h1ii Kr  1a personally embraced them with His arms. Kr  1a kissed them
face to face. Certainly it is not possible for any women in the three worlds
to achieve this except the gopis.
312 Kf l)a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Uddhava appreciated the exalted position of the gopis and wished to fall
down and take the dust of their feet on his head. Yet he did not dare to
ask the gopis to offer the dust from their feet; perhaps they would not be
agreeable. He therefore desired to have his head smeared with the dust of
the gopis' feet without their knowledge. He desired to become only an
insignificant clump of grass or herbs in the land of v rndavana.
The gopis were so much attracted to Kf§!la that when they heard the
vibration of His flute, they instantly left their families, children, honor and
feminine bashfulness and ran towards the place where Kf§!la was standing.
They did not consider whether they were passing over the road or through
the jungles. Imperceptibly, the dust of their feet was bestowed on small
grasses and herbs of Vrndavana. Not daring to place the dust of the gopis'
feet on his own head, Uddhava aspired to have a future birth in the position
of a clump of grass and herbs. He would then be able to have the dust of
the gop s' feet.
Uddhava appreciated the extraordinary fortune of the gopis, who
relieved themselves of all kinds of material contamination by placing on
their high, beautiful breasts the lotus feet of Kf§!J.a, which are not only
worshiped by the goddess of fortune, but by such exalted demigods as
Brahma and Lord Siva, and which are meditated upon by great yogis
within their hearts. Thus Uddhava desired to be able to constantly pray to
be honored by the dust of the gopis ' lotus feet. The gopis' chanting of the
transcendental pastimes of Lord Krwa has become celebrated all over the
three worlds.
After living in Vrndavana for some days, Uddhava desired to go back to
Kf§!J.a, and he begged permission to leave from Nanda Maharaja and Y asoda.
He had a farewell meeting with the gopis, and taking permission of them
also, he mounted his chariot to start for Mathura.
When U ddhava was about to leave, all the inhabitants of V rndavana,
headed by Maharaja Nanda and Yasoda, came to bid him good-bye and
presented him with various kinds of valuable goods secured in V rndavana.
They expressed their feelings with tears in their eyes due to intense attach
ment for Krwa. All of them desired benediction from Uddhava. They
desired always to remember the glorious activities of Krwa and wanted
their minds to be always fixed upon His lotus feet, their words always
engaged in glorifying Kr§!J.a, and their bodies always engaged in bowing
down and constantly remembering Him. This prayer of the inhabitants of
Vrndavana is the superexcellent type of self-realization. The method is
very simple: to fix the mind always on the lotus· feet of Kr§!J.a, to talk
always of Kr§!la without passing on to any other subject matter, and to
Delivery of the Message of Kf l)a to the Gopis 3 1 3
engage the body i n Kr l)a ' s service constantly. Specifically i n this human
form of life, one should engage his life, his , resources, words and intelligence
for the service of the L ord. Such kinds of activities only can elevate a
human being to the highest level of perfection. This is the verdict of all
authorities.
The inhabitants of V rndavana said : " By the will of the supreme
authority and according to the results of our own work, we may take our
birth anywhere. It doesn't matter where we are born, but our only prayer
is that we may simply be engaged in Kr  1a consciousness." A pure devotee
of L ord Kr pa never desires to be promoted to the heavenly planets, or
even to V aiku!ltha or Goloka V rndavana, because he has no desire for his
own personal satisfaction. A pure devotee regards both heaven and hell to
be on an equal level. Without Kr  1a, heaven is hell ; and with Kr !la, hell is
heaven. When U ddhava had sufficiently honored the worship of the pure
devotees of V rndavana, he returned to Mathura and to his master, Krsna.. . . .
After offering respects by bowing down before L ord Kr pa and Balarama,
he began to describe the wonderful devotional life of the inhabitants of
V rndavana. He presented all of the gifts given by the inhabitants of
V rndavana to Vasudeva, the father of Kr pa, and U grasena, the grandfather
of Kr pa.
Thus ends the Bhak tivedanta purport of the Forty-sixth Chap ter of
Kr pa, "Delivery of the Message of K fla to the Gopis. "
4 7 I . Krsna Pleases His Devotees• • •
For days together, Kr !la heard from Uddhava all the details of his visit
to Vrndavana, of the condition of His father and mother, and of the gopis
and the cowherd boys. Lord Kr !la was fully satisfied that Uddhava was able
to solace them by his instruction and by the message delivered to them.
Lord Kr !la then decided to go to the house of Kubj a, the hunchback
woman who had pleased Him by offering Him sandalwood when He was
entering the city of Mathura. As stated in the Bhagavad-gitii, Kr !la always
tries to please His devotees, and the devotees try to please Kr !la. As the
devotees always think of Kr !la within their hearts , so Krwa also thinks
of His devotees within Himself. When Kubja was converted into a beauti
ful society girl, she wanted Kr !la to come to her place so that she could
try to receive and worship Him in her own way. Society girls generally try
to satisfy their clients by offering their bodies to the men to enjoy. But
this society girl, Kubja, was actually captivated by a lust to satisfy her
senses with Kr !la. When Kr !la desired to go to the house of Kubja, He
certainly had no desire for sense gratification. By supplying the sandal
wood pulp to Krwa , Kubja had already satisfied His senses. On the plea of
her sense gratification, He decided to go to her house, not actually for sense
gratification, but to turn her into a pure devotee. Kr !la is always served
by many thousands of goddesses of fortune ; therefore He has no need to
satisfy His senses by going to a society girl. But as He is kind to everyone,
He decided to go there. It is said that the moon does not withhold its
shining from the courtyard of a crooked person. Similarly, Kr !la's tran
scendental mercy is never denied to anyone, whether one has rendered
service unto Him through lust , anger, fear or pure love. In the Caitanya
caritiimrta it is stated that if one wants to serve Kr !la and at the same time
wants to satisfy his own lusty desires, Kr !la will handle it so that the
devotee forgets his lusty desire and becomes fully purified and constantly
engaged in the service of the Lord.
3 1 4
Krsna Pleases His Devotees 315. . .
In order to fulfill His past promise, Kr IJa, along with Uddhava, went to
the house of Kubja. When Kr IJa reached her house, He saw that it was
completely decorated in a way to excite the lusty desires of a man. This
suggests that there were many nude pictures, on top of which were cano
pies and flags embroidered with pearl necklaces, along with comfortable
beds and cushioned chairs. The rooms were provided with flower garlands
'and were nicely scented with incense and sprinkled with scented water.
And the rooms were illuminated by nice lamps.
When Kubja saw that Lord Kr IJa had come to her house in order to
fulfill His promised visit, she immediately got up from the chair to receive
Him. Accompanied by her many girl friends, she began to talk with Him
with great respect and honor. After offering Him a nice place to sit, she
worshiped Lord Kr IJa in a manner just suitable to her position. Uddhava
was similarly received by Kubja and her girl friends, but he was not on an
equal level with Kr IJa, and he simply sat down on the floor.
Without wasting time, as one does in such situations, Kr IJa entered
the bedroom of Kubja. In the meantime, Kubja took her bath and
smeared her body with sandalwood pulp. She dressed herself with nice
garm nts, valuable j ewelry, ornaments and flower garlands. Chewing betel
nut and other intoxicating eatables and spraying herself with scents, she
appeared before Kr IJa. Her smiling glance and moving eyes were full of
feminine bashfulness as she stood gracefully before Lord Kr IJa, who is
known as Madhava, the husband of the goddess of fortune. When Kr IJa
saw that Kubja was hesitating to come before Him, He immediately caught
hold of her hand, which was decorated with bangles. With great affection,
He dragged her beside Him and made her sit by His side. Simply by having
previously supplied pulp of sandalwood to the Supreme Lord, Kr IJa,
Kubja became free from all sinful reactions and eligible to enjoy with Him.
She then took Kr IJa's lotus feet and placed them on her breasts, which
were burning with the blazing fire of lust. By smelling the fragrance of
Kr IJa's lotus feet, she immediately became relieved of all lusty desires.
She was thus allowed to embrace Krwa with her two arms and thus
mitigate her long-cherised desire to have Kr IJa as a visitor in her house.
It is stated in the Bhagavad-gitii that without being freed of all material
sinful reactions, one cannot be engaged in the transcendental loving service
of the Lord. Simply by supplying sandalwood pulp to Kr IJa, Kubja was
thus rewarded. She was not trained to worship Kr IJa in any other way;
therefore she wanted to satisfy Him by her profession. It is confirmed in
the Bhagavad-gitii that the Lord can be worshiped even by one's profession,
if it is sincerely offered for the pleasure of the Lord. Kubja then told
3 1 6 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Kr  a, "My dear friend, kindly remain with me at least for a few days.
Enjoy with me, You and Your lotus-eyed friend. I cannot leave You
immediately. Please grant my request. "
As stated in the Vedic versions, the Supreme Personality o f Godhead
has multi-potencies. According to expert opinion, Kubja represents the
puru a-sakti potency of Kfwa, just as Srimati Radhara ti represents His
cit-sakti potency. Although she requested Kr  a to remain with her for
some days, Kr  a politely impressed upon her that it was not possible for
Him to stay. Kr  a visits this material world occasionally, whereas His
connection wjth the spiritual world is eternal. Kr  a is always present
either in the Vaiku tha planets or in the Goloka Vrndavana planet. The
technical term for His presence in the spiritual world is prakata-lilii
After satisfying Kubja with sweet words, Kr  a returned to His place
along with Uddhava. There is a -warning in the Srimad-Bhagavatam that
KH a is not very easily worshiped because He is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, the chief among the Vi§rz.u-tattvas. To worship Kr  a or have
association with Him is not a very easy job. Specifically, there is a warning
for devotees who are attracted to Kr  a through conjugal love; it is not
good for them to desire to have sense gratification by direct association
with Kr  a. Actually, the activities of sense gratification are material. In
the spiritual world there are symptoms like kissing and embracing, but
there is no sense-gratificatory process as it exists in the material world.
This warning is specifically for those known as sahajiya, who take it for
granted that Kr  a is an ordinary human being. They desire to enjoy sex
life with Him in a perverted way. In a spiritual relationship, sense gratifica
tion is most insignificant. Anyone who desires a relationship of perverted
sense gratification with Kr va must be considered to be less intelligent.
His mentality requires to be reformed.
After a while, Kr va fulfilled His promise to visit Akriira at his house.
Akriira was in relationship with Kr va as His servitor, and Kr  a wanted
to get some service from him. He went there accompanied by both
Lord Balarama and U ddhava. When Kr  a, Balarama and U ddhava were
approaching the house of Akriira, Akriira came forward, embraced Ud
dhava and offered respectful obeisances, bowing down before Lord Kn a
and Balarama. Kr  a, Balarama and U ddhava offered him obeisances in
turn and were offered appropriate sitting places by Akriira. When all were
comfortably seated, Akriira washed their feet and sprinkled the water on
his head. Then he offered nice flowers and sandalwood pulp in regular
worship. All three of them became very satisfied by the behavior of Akriira.
Akriira then bowed down before KH a, putting his head on the ground.
Krsna Pleases His Devotees 317. . .
Then, keeping Kr  a's lotus feet on his lap, Akrura began to gently
massage them. When Akrura was fully satisfied in the presence of Kr p.a
and Balarama, his eyes became filled with tears of love for Kr  a, and he
b egan to offer his prayers as follows.
"My dear Lord Kr  a, it is very kind of You to have killed Kamsa and
his associates. You have delivered the whole family of the Y adu dynasty
from the greatest calamity. Your saving of the great Y adu dynasty will
always be remembered by them. My dear Lord Kr  a and Balarama, You
are the original personality from whom everything has emanated. You
are the original cause of all causes. You have inconceivable energy, and
You are all-pervasive. But for Yourself, there is no other cause and effect,
gross or subtle. You are the Supreme Brahman realized by the study of the
Vedas. By Your inconceivable energy, You are actually visible before us.
You create this cosmic manifestation by Your own potencies, and You
enter into it Yourself. As the five material elements, earth  water, fire, air,
and sky, are distributed in everything manifested by different kinds of
bodies, so You alone enter into different varieties of bodies, created by
Your own energy. You enter the body as the individual soul as well as
independently as the Supersoul. The material body is created by Your
inferior energy. The living entities, individual souls, are part and parcel of
You, and the Supersoul is Your localized representation. This material
body, the living entity and the Super soul constitute an individual living
being, but originally they are all different energies of the one Supreme
Lord.
"In the material world, You are creating, maintaining and dissolving the
whole manifestation by interaction of three qualities, namely goodness,
passion and ignorance. You are not implicated by the activities of those
material qualities because Your supreme knowledge is never overcome,
as is the case with the individual li ving entity."
As the Supreme Lord enters into this material creation and thus the
creation, maintenance and destruction are going on in their due course, so
the part and parcel living entity enters the material elements and has his
material body created for him. The difference between the living entity
and the Lord is that the living entity is part and parcel of the Supreme
Lord and has the tendency to be overcome by the interaction of material
qualities. Kr  a, the Parambrahman or the Supreme Brahman, being always
situated in full knowledge, is never overcome by such activities. Therefore
Kr  a's name is A cyuta, meaning He who never falls down. Kr  a's know
ledge of spiritual identity is never overcome by material action, whereas
the identity of the minute part and parcel living entities is prone to be
318 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
overcome by material action. The individual living entities are eternally
part and parcel of God. As minute sparks of the original fire, Kr  a, they
have the tendency to become extinguished.
Akriira continued: "The less intelligent class of men misunderstand
Your transcendental form to be also made of material energy. That con
cept is not at all applicable to You. Actually, You are all spiritual, and
there is no, difference between You and Y our body. Because of this, there
is no question of Your being conditioned or liberated. You are ever
liberated in any condition of life. As stated in the Bhagavad-gitii, 'Only the
fools and rascals consider You to be an ordinary man.' To consider Your
Lordship to be one of us, conditioned by the material nature, is a mistake
due to our imperfect knowledge. When people deviate from the original
knowledge of the Vedas, they try to identify the ordinary living entities
with Your Lordship. Your Lordship has appeared on this earth in Your
original form in order to reestablish the real knowledge that the living
entities are neither one with nor equal to the Supreme God. My dear
Lord, You are always situated in uncontaminated goodness (suddha
sattva). Your appearance is necessary to reestablish actual Vedic know
ledge, as o pposed to the atheistic philosophy which tries to establish that
God and living entities are one and the same. My dear Lord Kr :pa, this
time You have appeared in the home of Vasudeva as His son, along with
Your plenary expansion, Sri Balarama. Your mission is to kill all the
atheistic royal families, along with their huge military strength. You have
advented Yourself to minimize the overburden of the world, and in order
to fulfill this mission, You have glorified the dynasty of Yadu, appearing
in the family as one of its members.
"My dear Lord, today my home has become purified by Your presence.
I have become the most fortunate person in the world. The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who is worshipable by all different kinds of demi
gods, Pitrs, living entities, kings and emperors, and who is the Supersoul
of everything, has come into my home. The water of His lotus feet is
purifying the three worlds, and now He has kindly come to my place. Who
is there in the three worlds among factually learned men who will not take
shelter of Your lotus feet and surrender unto You? Who, knowing well
that no one can be as affectionate as You are to Your devotees, is so
foolish that he will decline to become Your devotee? Throughout the
Vedic literature it is declared that You are the dearmost friend of every
living entity. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad gitii: suhrdam sarva
bhfltiiniim. You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, completely
capable of fulfilling the desires of Your devotees. You are the real friend
Kr l).a Pleases His Devotees 3 1 9
o f everyone. In spite of giving Yourself t o Your devotees, You are never
depleted of Your original potency. Your potency neither decreases nor
increases in volume.
"My dear Lord , it is very difficult for even the great mystic yogzs and
demigods to ascertain Your movement. You cannot be approached b y
them, and yet out of Your causeless mercy You have kindly consented to
come to my ho me. This is the most auspicious mo ment in the j ourney of
my material existence. B y Your grace only, I can j ust understand that my
home , my wife , my children and my worldly possessions are all different
bonds to material existence. Please cut the knot and save me from this
entanglement of false society, friendship and love . "
Lord Sri Kr§ la was very pleased by Akriira's offering o f prayers. His
smile was captivating Akriira more and more. The Lord replied him as
follows : "My dear Akriira, in spite of your submissiveness, I consider you
to be My superior, on the level with My father and teacher and most
well-wishing friend. Y ou are , therefore , worshipable by Me, and since Y ou
are My uncl e , I am always to be protected by you . I desire to be main
tained by you because I am one of your own children. Apart from this
filial relationship, you are always to be worshiped . Anyone who desires
good fortune must offer his respectful obeisances unto personalities like
you . Y ou are more than the demigods. People go to worship the demigods
when they are in need of some sense gratification ; the demigods offer
benediction to their devotees after being worshiped by them. But a devotee
like Akriira is always ready to offer the greatest benediction to the people.
A saintly person or devotee is free to offer benediction to everyone,
whereas the demigods can offer benediction only after being worshiped.
One can take advantage of the place of pilgrimage only after going there.
By worshiping the particular demigod, it takes a long time for fulfillment
of the desire ; but saintly persons like you , My dear Akriira , can immedi
ately fulfill all the desires of the devotees. My dear Akriira, you are always
our friend and well-wisher. Y ou are always ready to act for our welfare.
Kindly , therefore , go to Hastinapura and see what arrangement has been
made for the Pal).<).avas. "
Krwa was very anxious t o know about the sons of Pap<).u , because a t a
very young age , they had lost their father. Being very friendly to His
devotees, Kr§pa was anxious to know about them, and therefore He
deputed Akriira to go to H astinapura and get information of the real
situation. Kr§pa continued to say, "I have heard that after the death of
King Pap<).u , his young sons, Yudhi§thira, Bhima, Arjuna, N akula and
Sahadeva, along with their widowed mother , have come under the charge
320 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
of Dhrtara tra, who is to look after them as their guardian. But I have also
heard that Dhftara tra is not only blind from birth, but also blind in his
affection for his cruel son, Duryodhana. The five Pa  avas are the sons of
King Pa  u, but Dhftara tra, due to his plans and designs, is not favorably
disposed towards the Pa  avas. Kindly go there and study how Dhrtara tra
is dealing with the Pa  avas. On receipt of your report, I shall consider
how to favor the Pa  avas." In this way the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, K.rwa, ordered Akriira to go to Hastinapura, and then He
returned home, accompanied by Balarama and Uddhava.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Forty-seventh Chapter of
Kr  a, "K[§rza Pleases His Devotees. "
48 I Ill-motivated Dhrtarastra• • •
Thus being ordered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead , Sri Kr !la,
Akriira visited H astinapura. H astinapura is said to be the site of what is
now New D elhi. The part of N ew D elhi, which is still known as Indra
prastha, is accepted by people in general as the old capital of the Pa!l avas.
The very name H astinapura suggests that there were many hastis, or
elephants. Because the Pa!l avas kept many elephants in the capital, it was
called H astinapura. Keeping elephants is a very expensive j ob ; to keep
many elephants, therefore, the kingdom must be very rich, and H astinapura
was full of elephants, horses, chariots and other opulences. When Akriira
reached Hastinapura, he saw that the capital was full of all kinds of
opulences. The kings of H astinapura were taken to b e the ruling kings of
the whole world . Their fame was widely spread throughout the entire
kingdom , and their administration was conducted under the good counsel
of learned b riihmaT;ws.
After seeing the very opulent capital city, Akriira met King Dhrtara tra.
H e also saw grandfather Bhi ma sitting with him. After meeting the.m, he
went to see Vidura and then Vidura's sister, Kunti. One after another, he
saw the son of Somadatta, and the King of Bahlika, Dro!lacarya, Krpacarya,
Kar!la and Suyodhana. ( Suyodhana is another name of Duryodhana. ) H e
saw the five Pa!l ava brothers and _other friends and relatives living i n the
city. Akriira was known as the son of Gandi, so whomever he met was very
pleased to receive him . He was offered a good seat at his receptions, and he
inquired all about his relatives' welfare and other activities.
Since he was deputed by L ord Krwa to visit H astinapura, it is under
stood that he was very intelligent in studying a diplomatic situation.
Dhrtara tra was unlawfully occupying the throne after the death of the
King Pa!l u , despite the presence of Pa!l u 's sons. Akriira wanted to study
the whole situation by remaining there. H e could understand very well
32 1
322 Kr !J.a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
that ill-motivated Dhrtara§tra was much inclined in favor of his own sons.
In fact, Dhrtara§tra had already usurped the kingdom and was now insti
gating and planning to dispose of the five Pat;J.9-ava brothers. Akrura knew
also that all the sons of Dhrtara§tra, headed by Duryodhana, were very
crooked politicians. Dhftara§tra did not act in accordance with the good
instruction given by Bhi§ma and Vidura, but he was being conducted by
the ill instruction of such persons as Kart;J.a, Sakuni and others. Akrura
decided to stay in Hastinapura for a few months to study the whole
political situation.
Gradually Akrura learned from Kunti and Vidura that Dhrtara§tra was
very intolerant and envious of the five Pat;J.9-ava brothers because of their
extraordinary learning in military science and their greatly developed
bodily strength. They acted as true chivalrous heroes, exhibited all the
good qualities of k§atriyas, and were very responsible princes, always
thinking of the welfare of the citizens. Akrura also learned that the envious
Dhrtara§tra, in consultation with his ill-advised son, had tried to kill the
Pat;J.9-avas by poisoning them.
Akrura happened to be one of the cousins of Kunti; therefore, after
meeting him, she began to inquire about her paternal relatives. Thinking
of her birthplace, she began to cry. She asked Akrura whether her father,
mother, brothers, sisters and other friends at home were still remembering
her. She especially inquired about Kr§t;J.a and Balarama, her glorious
nephews. She asked: "Does Krwa, who is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who is very affectionate to His devotees, remember my sons?
Does Balarama remember us?" Inside herself, Kunti felt like a she-deer in
the midst of tigers, and actually her position was like that. After the death
of her husband, King Pat;J.9-u, she was supposed to take care of the five
Pat;J.9-ava children, but D hrtara§tra was always planning to kill them. She
was certainly living as a poor innocent animal in the midst of several tigers.
Being a devotee of Lord Krwa, she was always thinking of Him and
expecting that one day Krwa would come and save them from their
dangerous position. She inquired from Akrura whether Kr§t;J.a proposed to
come to advise the fatherless Pat;I9-avas how to get free of the intriguing
policy of Dhrtara§tra and his sons. By talking with Akrura about all these
affairs, she felt herself helpless and began to exclaim: "My dear Krwa,
my dear Krwa, You are the supreme mystic, the Supersoul of the universe.
You are the real well-wisher of the whole universe. My dear Govinda, at
this time You are far away from me, yet I pray to surrender unto Y our
lotus feet. At the present moment I am very much griefstricken with my
five fatherless sons. I can fully understand that but for Y our lotus feet
Ill-Motivated Dhrtarastra. . .
323
there is no shelter or protection. Your lotus feet can deliver all aggrieved
souls because You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead. One can be
safe from the clutches of repeated birth and death by Your mercy only.
My dear Kn a, You are the supreme pure one, the Supersoul and the
master of all yogis. What can I say? I can simply offer my respectful
obeisances unto You. Accept me as Your fully surrendered devotee."
Although Kn a was not present before her, Kunti offered her prayers to
Him as if she were in His presence face to face. This is possible for anyone
following in the footsteps of Kunti. Kr  a does not have to be physically
present everywhere. He is actually present everywhere by spiritual potency,
and one simply has to surrender unto Him sincerely. When Kunti was
offering her prayers very feelingly to Kn a, she could not check herself
and began to cry loudly before Akrura. Vidura was also present, and both
Akrura and Vidura became very sympathetic to the mother of the
Pa l)avas. They began to solace her by glorifying her sons, Yudhi thira,
Arjuna and Bhima. They pacified her, saying that her sons were extra
ordinarily powerful; she should not be perturbed about them, since they
were born of great demigods, Y amaraja, Indra and V ayu 
Akrura decided to return and report on the extreme circumstances in
which he found Kunfi and her five sons. He first wanted to give good
advice to Dhrtara tra, who was so favorably inclined toward his own
son and unfavorably inclined toward the Pa l)avas. When Kunti and
Dhrtara tra were sitting among friends and relatives, Akrura began to
address him, calling him "Varcitravirya." Viircitravirya means the son of
Vicitravirya. Vicitravirya was the name of the father of Dhftara tra, but
Dhrtara tra was not actually the begotten son of Vicitravirya. He was the
begotten son of Vyasadeva. F ormerly it was the system that if a man were
unable to beget a child, his brother could beget a child in the womb of his
wife. That system is now forbidden in this age of Kali. Akrura called
Dhrtara tra "Varcitravirya" sarcastically because he was not actually
begotten by his father. He was the son of Vyasadeva. When a child was
begotten in the wife by the husband's brother, the child was claimed by
the husband, but of course the child was not begotten by the husband.
This sarcastic remark pointed out that Dhrtara tra was falsely claiming the
throne on heriditary grounds. Actually the son of Pa 9u was the rightful
king, and in the presence of Pa l)u's sons, the Pa l)avas, Dhrtara tra should
not have occupied the throne.
Akrura then said, "My dear son of Vici ravirya, you have unlawfully
usurped the throne of the Pa 9avas. Anyway, somehow or other you are
now on the throne. Therefore I beg to advise you to please rule the
324 K[ t;Ia, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
kingdom on moral and ethical principles. If you do so and try to teach your
subjects in that way, then your name and fame will be perpetual." Akriira
hinted that although Dhrtara tra was ill-treating his nephews, the Pal)-9-avas,
they happened to be his subjects. "Even if you treat them not as the
owners of the throne, but as your subjects, you should impartially think
of their welfare as though they were your own sons. But if you do not
follow this principle and act in just the opposite way, then you will be
unpopular among your subjects, and in the next life you will have to live
in a hellish condition. I therefore hope you will treat your sons and the
sons of Pal}9-u equally. Akriira hinted that if Dhftara tra did not treat the
Pal}9-avas and his sons as equals, then surely there would be a fight between
the two camps of cousins. Since the Pal}9-avas cause was just, they would
come out victorious, and the sons of Dhrtara tra would be killed. This was
a prophecy told by Akriira to Dhrtara tra.
Akriira further advised Dhrtara tra, "In this material world, no one can
remain as an eternal companion to another. By chance only we assemble
together in the family, in the society, in the community or in the nation,
but at the end, because every one of us has to give up the body, we must
be separated. One should not, therefore, be unnecessarily affectionate
toward family members." Dhrtara tra's affection was also unlawful and
did not show much intelligence. In plain words, Akriira hinted to
Dhrtara tra that his staunch family affection was due to his gross ignorance
of fact. Although we appear to be combined together in family, society
or nation, each one of us has an individual destiny. Everyone takes birth
according to individual past work; therefore everyone has to individually
enjoy or suffer the result of his own karma. There is no possibility of
improving one's destiny by cooperate living. Sometimes it happens that
one's father accumulates wealth by illegal ways, and the son takes away
the money, although it is hard -earned by the father. It is just like a small
fish in the ocean who eats the material body of the large, old fish. One
ultimately cannot accumulate wealth illegaly for the gratification of his
family, society, community or nation. That many great empires which
developed in the past are no longer existing because their wealth was
squandered away by later descendants is an illustration of this principle.
One who does not know this subtle law of fruitive activities and thus gives
up the principles of moral and ethical principles only carries with him the
reactions of his sinful activities. His ill-gotten wealth and possessions are
taken by someone else, and he goes to the darkest region of hellish life.
One should not, therefore, accumulate more wealth than is alloted to him
by destiny; otherwise he will be factually blind to his own interest. Instead
Ill-Motivated Dhrtarastra. . .
325
of fulfilling his self-interest, he will act in just the opposite way for his own
downfall.
Akrura continued: "My dear Dhrtara tra, I beg to advise you not to be
blind about the fact of this material existence. Material conditional life,
either in distress or in happiness, is to be accepted as a dream. One should
try to bring his mind and senses under control and live very peacefully for
spiritual advancement in Kr va consciousness." In the Caitanya-caritamrta
it is said that except for persons who are in Kr va consciousness, everyone
is always in a disturbed condition of mind and is full of anxiety. Even those
who are trying for liberation, or merging into the Brahman effulgence, or
the yog'is who are trying to achieve perfection in mystic power, cannot
have peace of mind. Pure devotees of Kr va have no demands to make of
Kr va. They are simply satisfied with service to Him. Actual peace and
mental tranquility can be attained only in perfect Knva consciousness.
After hearing moral instructions from Akrura, Dhrtara tra replied: "My
dear Akrura, you are very charitable in giving me good instructions, but
unfortunately I cannot accept it. A person who is destined to die does not
utilize the effect of nectar, although it may be administered to him. I can
understand that your instructions are very valuable. Unfortunately, they
do not stay in my flickering mind, just as the glittering lightning in the sky
does not stay in a fixed cloud. I can understand only that no one can stop
the onward progress of the supreme will. I understand that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Knp.a, has appeared in the family of the Yadus in
order to decrease the overburdened load of this earth."
Dhftara tra gave hints to Akrura that he had complete faith in Kr va,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. At the same time, he was very much
partial to his family members. In the very near future, Kr va would
vanquish all the members of his family, and in a helpless condition,
Dhftara tra would take shelter of Kr va's feet. In order to show His special
favor to a devotee, Kr va usually takes away all the objects of his material
affection. He thus forces the devotee to be materially helpless, with no
alternative than to accept the lotus feet of Kr va. This actually happened
to Dhftara tra after the end of the Battle of Kuruk etra.
D hrtaraHra could realize two opposing factors acting before him. He
could understand that Kr va was there to remove all the unnecessary
burdens of the world. His sons were an unnecessary burden, and so he
expected that they would be killed. At the same time, he could not rid
himself of his unlawful affection for his sons. Understanding these two
contradictory factors, he began to offer his respectful obeisances to the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. "The contradictory ways of material
326 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
existence are very difficult to understand; they can only be taken as the
inconceivable execution of the plan of the Supreme, who by His incon
ceivable energy creates this material world and enters into it and sets into
action the three modes of nature. When everything is created, He enters
into each and every living entity and into the smallest atom. N o one can
understand the incalculable plans of the Supreme Lord."
After hearing this statement, Akrura could clearly understand that
Dhftara tra was not going to change his policy of discriminating against
the Pa  avas in favor of his sons. He at once took leave of his friends in
Hastinapura and returned to his home in the kingdom of the Yadus. After
returning home, he vividly informed Lord Kr  a and Balarama of the
actual situation in Hastinapura and the intentions of Dhrtara tra. Akrura
was sent to Hastinapura by Kr  a to study. By the grace of the Lord, he
was successful and informed Krsna about the actual situation .. . .
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Forty-eighth Chapter of
Kr  a, "Ill-Motivated Dhrtarii§tra. "
49 I Krsna Erects the Dvaraka Fort• • •
After his death, Kamsa 's two wives became widows. According to Vedic
civilization, a woman is never independent. She has three stages of life: In
childhood a woman should live under the protection of her father, a
youthful woman should live under the protection of her young husband,
and in the event of the death of her husband she should live either under
the protection of her grown-up children, or if she has no grown-up children,
she must go back to her father and live as a widow under his protection. It
appears that Kamsa had no grown-up sons. After becoming widows, his
wives returned to the shelter of their father. Kamsa had two queens. One
was Asti, and the other Prapti, and both happened to be the daughters of
King Jarasandha, the lord of the B ehar Province (known in those days as
Magadharaja). After reaching home, both queens explained their awkward
position following Kamsa's death. The King of Magadha, Jarasandha, was
mortified on hearing their pitiable condition due to the slaughter. When
informed of the death of Kamsa, J arasandha decided on the spot that he
would rid the world of all the members of the Y adu dynasty . He decided
that since Kr§!la had killed Kamsa, the whole dynasty of the Y adus should
be killed.
He began to make extensive arrangements to attack the kingdom of
Mathura with his innumerable military phalanxes , consisting of many
thousands of chariots, horses, elephants and infantry soldiers. J arasandha
prepared thirteen such military phalanxes in order to retaliate the death of
Kamsa. Taking with him all his military strength, he attacked the capital
of the Y adu kings, Mathura, surrounding it from all directions. Sri Kf§pa ,
who appeared a s a n ordinary human being, saw the immense strength of
J ariisandha, which appeared as an ocean about to cover a beach at any
moment . He also perceived that the inhabitants of Mathura were over
whelmed with fear. He began to think within Himself about the situation
327
328 Kr J?a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
of His mission as an incarnation and how to tackle the present situation
before Him. His mission was to diminish the overburdened population of
the whole world ; therefore He took the opportunity of facing so many
men, chariots, elephants, and horses. The military strength of J arasandha
had appeared before Him, and He decided to kill the entire force of
Jarasandha so that they would not be able to go back and again reorgan
ize their military strength.
While Lord Kr  a was thinking in that way, two military chariots,
fully equipped with drivers, weapons, flags and other implements, arrived
for Him from outer space. Kr  a saw the two chariots present before
Him, and immediately addressed His attendant brother, Balarama, who is
also known as Sankar a a: "My dear elder brother, You are the best
among the Aryans, You are the Lord of the universe, and specifically,
You are the protector of the Y adu dynasty. The members of the Y adu
dynasty sense great danger before the soldiers of Jarasandha, and they are
very much aggrieved. Just to give them protection, Your chariot is also
here, filled with military weapons. I request You to sit down on Your
chariot and kill all these soldiers, the entire military strength of the
enemy. Naturally, both of Us have descended on this earth just to
annihilate such unnecessary bellicose forces and to give protection to the
pious devotees. So we have the opportunity to fulfill Our mission. Please
let Us execute it." Thus Kr  a and Balarama, the descendants of the
Gadaha King, Dasarha, decided to annihilate the thirteen military com
panies of J arasandha.
Kr  a went upon the chariot on which Daruka was the driver and with
a small army, and to the blowing of conchshells, He came out of the city
of Mathura. Curiously enough, although the other party was equipped
with greater military strength, just after hearing the vibration of Kr  a's
conchshell, their hearts were shakened. When Jarasandha saw both
Balarama and Kr  a, he was a little bit compassionate, because both Kr !la
and Balarama happened to be related to him as grandsons. He specifically
addressed Kr  a as Puru adhama, meaning the lowest among men.
Actually Kr  a is known in all Vedic literatures as Puru ottama, the
highest among men. Jarasandha had no intention of addressing Kr !la as
Puru ottama, but great scholars have determined the true meaning of the
word puru§iidhama to be "one who makes all other personalities go
downward." Actually no one can be equal to or greater than the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.
J arasandha said, "It will be a great dishonor for me to fight with boys
like Krsna and Balarama." Because Krsna had killed Kamsa, J arasandha. . . . . .
Kr t:Ia Erects the Dvaraka Fort 329
specifically addressed Him as the killer of His own relatives. Kamsa had
. killed so many of his own nephews, yet J arasaudha did not take notice
of it; but because Kr§ a had killed His maternal uncle, Kamsa, J arasandha
tried to criticize Him. That is the way of demoniac dealing. Demons do
not try to find their own faults, but try to find the faults of their friends.
J arasandha also criticized Kr§ a for not even being a k§atriya. Because
He was raised by Maharaja N anda, Kr§ a was not a k§atriya, but a vaisya.
Vaisyas are generally called guptas, and the word gupta can also be used
to mean "hidden." So Krwa was both hidden and raised by Nanda
Maharaja. Jarasandha accused Kr§ a of three faults: that He killed His own
maternal uncle, that He was hidden in His childhood, and that He was
not even a k§atriya. And therefore Jarasandha felt ashamed to fight with
Him.
Next he turned toward Balarama and addressed Him: "You, Balarama!
If You like You can fight along with Him, and if You have patience, then
You can wait to be killed by my arrows. Thus You can be promoted to
heaven. " It is stated in the Bhagavad-gitii that a k§atriya can become
benefited in two ways while fighting. If a k§atriya gains victory in the
fight, he enjoys the results of victory, but even if he is killed in the fight,
he is promoted to the heavenly kingdom.
After hearing Jarasandha speak in that way, Kr§ a answered: "My dear
King J arasandha, those who are heroes do not talk much. Rather, they
show their prowess. Because you are talking much, it appears that you are
assured of your death in this battle. We do not care to hear you anymore,
because it is useless to hear the words of a person who is going to die or
one who is very distressed." In order to fight with Kr§ a, J arasandha
surrounded Him from all sides with great military strength, and the sun
appeared covered by the cloudy air and dust. Similarly, Kr§ a, the
supreme sun, was covered by the military strength of Jarasandha.
Kr§ a's and Balarama's chariots were marked with pictures of Garu a and
palm trees. The women of Mathura were all standing on the tops of the
houses and palaces and gates to see the wonderful fight, but when Kr§ a's
chariot was surrounded by Jarasandha's military force, they became so
frightened that some of them fainted. Kr§ a saw Himself overwhelmed by
the military strength of J arasandha. His small number of soldiers were
being harassed by them, so He immediately took up His bow, named
Sani.ga.
He began to take His arrows from their case, and one after another He
set them on the bowstring and shot them toward the enemy. They were so
accurate that the elephants, horses and infantry soldiers of J arasandha
330 Kn a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
were quickly killed. The incessant arrows thrown by Kr t;Ia appeared as a
whirlwind of blazing fire killing all the military strength of J arasandha.
As Kr t;Ia released His arrows, gradually all the elephants began to fall
down, their heads severed by the arrows. Similarly, all the horses fell, and
the chariots also, along with their flags. The chariot fighters and the
chariot drivers fell as well. Almost all the infantry soldiers fell on the field
of battle, their heads, hands and legs cut off. In this way, many thousands
of elephants and horses were killed, and their blood began to flow just like
the waves of a river. In that river, the severed arms of the men appeared to
be snakes, their heads appeared to be tortoises, and the dead bodies of the
elephants appeared to be small islands. The dead horses appeared to be
sharks. By the arrangement of the supreme will, there was a great river
of blood filled with paraphernalia. The hands and legs of the infantry
soldiers were floating like seaweed, and the floating bows of the soldiers
appeared to be waves of the river. And all the j ewelry from the bodies of
the soldiers and commanders appeared to be so many pebbles flowing
down the river of blood.
Lord Balarama, who is also known as Sankar at;I-a, began to fight with
His club in such a heroic way that the river of blood created by Kr t;Ia
overflooded. Those who were cowards became very much afraid upon
seeing the ghastly and horrible scene, and those who were heroes began to
talk delightedly among themselves about the heroism of the two brothers.
Although Jarasandha was equipped with a vast ocean of military strength,
the fighting of Lord Kr t;I-a and Balarama converted the whole situation
into a ghastly scene which was far beyond ordinary fighting. Persons of
ordinary mind cannot estimate how it could be possible, but when such
activities are accepted as pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
under whose will everything is possible, then this can be understood. The
Supreme Personality of Godhead is creating, maintaining and dissolving
the cosmic manifestation by His will only. For Him to create such a vast
scene of devastation while fighting with an enemy is not so wonderful.
And yet, because Kr  a and Balarama were fighting with J arasandha just
like ordinary human beings, the affair appeared to be wonderful.
All the soldiers of Jarasandha were killed, and he was the only one left
alive. Certainly he became very depressed at this point. Sri Balarama
immediately arrested him, just as, with great strength, one lion captures
another lion. But while Lord Balarama was binding J arasandha with the
rope of V aru a and ordinary ropes also, Lord Kr  a, with a greater plan in
mind for the future, asked Him not to arrest him. Jarasandha was then
released by Kr t;I-a. As a great fighting hero, Jarasandha became very much
Krsna Erects the Dvaraka Fort 331. . .
ashamed, and he decided that he would no longer live as a king, but would
resign from his position in the royal order and go to the forest to practice
meditation under severe austerities and penances.
As he was returning home with other royal friends, however, they
advised him not to retire, but to regain strength to fight again with KHrta
in the near future. The princely friends of J arasandha began to instruct
him that ordinarily it would not have been possible for him to have been
defeated by the strength of the Yadu kings, but the defeat which he had
experienced was simply due to his ill luck. The princely order encouraged
King Jarasandha. His fighting, they said, was certainly heroic ; therefore,
he should not take his defeat very seriously, as it was due only to his past
mistakes. After all, there was no fault in his fighting.
In this way, Jarasandha, the King of Magadha Province, having lost all
his strength and having been insulted by his arrest and subsequent release,
could do nothing but return to his kingdom. Thus Lord Kr IJa conquered
the soldiers of Jarasandha. Although Krwa's army was tiny in comparison
to Jarasandha's, not a pinch of His strength was lost, whereas all of
Jarasandha's men were killed.
At that time the denizens of heaven became very pleased and began to
offer their respects by chanting in glorification of the Lord and by
showering Him with flowers. They accepted the victory with great appre
ciation. Jarasandha returned to his kingdom, and Mathura City was
made safe from the danger of an imminent attack. The citizens of Mathura
organized the combined services of a circus of professional singers, like
siitas, miigadhas, and poets who could compose nice songs, and they began
to chant the victory glorification of Lord Kr IJa. When Lord Krwa entered
the city after the victory, many bugles, conches and kettledrums were
sounded, and the vibrations of various musical instruments, like bherya,
tiirya, vir-a, flute and mrdwiga- all j oined together to make a beautiful
reception. While Krwa was entering, the whole city was very much
cleansed, all the different streets and roads were sprinkled with water, and
the inhabitants, being joyous, decorated their respective houses, roads and
shops with flags and festoons. The briih mar-as chanted Vedic mantras at
numerous places. The people constructed road crossings, entrances, lanes
and streets. When Lord Kr rta was entering the nicely decorated city of
Mathura in a festive attitude, the ladies and girls of Mathura prepared
different kinds of flower garlands to make the ceremony more auspicious.
In accordance with the Vedic custom, they took yogurt mixed with
freshly grown green grass and began to strew it here and there to make the
victory jubilation even more auspicious. As Kr rta passed through the
332 Kr  ' the Supreme Personality of Godhead
street, all the ladies and women began to regard Him with great affection.
Kn a and Balarama carried various kinds of booty, ornaments and j ewels
carefully collected from the battlefield and presented them to King
Ugrasena. Krwa thus offered His respect to His grandfather because he was
at that time the crowned king of the Yadu dynasty.
Jarasandha, the King of Magadha, not only besieged the city of Mathura
once, but he attacked it seventeen times in the same way, equipped with
the same number of military phalanxes. Each and every time, he was
defeated, and all his soldiers were killed by Kr Fa, and each time he had
to return disappointed in the same way. Each time, the princely order of
the Yadu dynasty arrested Jarasandha in the same way and again released
him in an insulting manner, and each time Jarasandha shamelessly returned
home.
While J arasandha was attempting one such attack, a Y avan a king
somewhere to the south of Mathura became attracted by the opulence of
the Yadu dynasty and also attacked the city. It is said that the king of the
Y avanas, known as Kalayavana, was induced to attack by Narada.
This story is narrated in the Vi§[!-U Puriir-a. Once, Gargamuni, the priest of
the Yadu dynasty, was taunted by his brother-in-law. When the kings of
the Yadu dynasty heard the taunt they laughed at him, and Gargamuni
became angry at the Y adu kings. He decided that he would produce some
one who would be very fearful to the Yadu dynasty, so he pleased Lord
Siva and received from him the benediction of a son. He begot this son,
Kalayavana, in the wife of a Y avana king. This Kalayavana inquired
from Narada, "Who are the most powerful kings in the world?" Narada
informed him that the Y adus were the most powerful. Being thus informed
by Narada, Kalayavana attacked the city of Mathura at the same time that
Jarasandha attempted to attack it for the eighteenth time. Kalayavana was
very anxious to declare war on a king of the world who would be a suitable
combatant for him, but he had not found any. However, being informed
about Mathura by Narada, he thought it wise to attack this city. When he
attacked Mathura he brought with him thirty million Y avana sol
diers. When Mathura was thus besieged, Lord Sri Kr  J-a began to consider
how much the Yadu dynasty was in distress, being threatened by the at
tacks of two formidable enemies, J arasandha and Kalayavana. Time was
growing very short. Kalayavana was already besieging Mathura from all
sides, and it was expected that the next day Jarasandha would also come,
equipped with the same number of divisions of soldiers as in his previous
seventeen attempts. Kr  J-a was certain that Jarasandha would take advan
tage of the opportunity to capture Mathura when it was also being besieged
Kf l)a Erects the Dvaraka Fort 333
by Kalayavana. He therefore thought it wise to take precautionary
measures to defend the strategic points of Mathura. If both Kr l)a and
Balarama were engaged in fighting with Kalayavana at one place,
Jarasandha might come at another place to attack the whole Yadu family
and take his revenge. J adisandha was very powerful, and having been
defeated seventeen times, he might vengefully kill the members of the
Yadu family or arrest them and take them to his kingdom. Kf l)a therefore
decided to construct a formidable fort in a place where no two-legged
animal, either man or demon, could enter. He decided to keep His relatives
there so that He would then be free to fight with the enemy. It appears
that formerly Dvaraka was also part of the kingdom of Mathura, because in
the Srimad-Bhagavatam it is stated that Kr l)a constructed a fort in the
midst of the sea. Remnants of the fort which Kf l)a constructed are still
existing on the Bay of Dvaraka.
He first of all constructed a very strong wall covering ninety-six square
miles, and the wall itself was within the sea. It was certainly wonderful
and was planned and constructed by Visvakarma. No ordinary architect
could construct such a fort within the sea, but an architect like V isvakarma,
who is considered to be the engineer among the demigods, can execute
such wonderful craftmanship anywhere in any part of the universe. If huge
planets can be floated in weightlessness in the outer space by the arrange
ment of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, surely the architectural
construction of a fort within the sea covering a space of ninety-six square
miles was not a very wonderful act.
It is stated in the Srimad-Bhiigavatam that this new, well-constructed
city, developed within the sea, had regular planned roads, streets and lanes.
 ot only were there well-planned roads, trees and lanes, but there were well
planned paths and gardens filled with plants known as kalpavrk as, or desire
trees. These desire trees are not like the ordinary trees of the material world;
the desire trees are found in the spiritual world. By Kr l)a 's supreme will,
everything is possible, so such desire trees were planted in this city of
Dvaraka constructed by Kr l)a. The city was also filled with many palaces
andgopuras, or big gates. These gopuras are still found in some of the larger
temples. They are very high and constructed with extreme artistic skill.
Such palaces and gates held golden waterpots (kalasa). These water pots on
the gates or in the palaces are considered to be auspicious signs.
Almost all the palaces were skyscrapers. In each and every house there
were big pots of gold and silver and grains stocked in underground rooms.
And there were many golden waterpots within the rooms. The bedrooms
were all bedecked with jewels, and the floors were mosiac pavements of
334 Kr J)a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
marakata j ewels. The V i  u Deity, worshiped by the descendants of Y adu,
was installed in each house in the city. The residential quarters were so
arranged that the different castes, briihmarzas, k§atriyas, vaisyas and sudras,
had their respective quarters. It appears from this that the caste system
was existing even at that time. In the center of the city there was another
residential quarter made specifically for King Ugrasena. This place was the
most dazzling of all the houses.
When the demigods saw that Kr  a was constructing a particular city of
His own choice, they sent the celebrated piirijiita flower of the heavenly
planet to be planted in the new city, and they also sent a parliamentary
house, Sudharma. The specific quality of this assembly house was that
anyone participating in a meeting within it would overcome the influence
of invalidity due to old age. The demigod Varu a also presented a horse,
which was all white except for black ears and which could run at the speed
of the mind. Kuvera, the treasurer of the demigods, presented the art of
attaining the eight perfectional stages of material opulences. In this way,
all the demigods began to present their respective gifts according to their
different capacities. There are thirty-three million demigods, and each of
them is entrusted with a particular department of universal management.
All the demigods took the opportunity of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead's constructing a city of His own choice to present their respective
gifts, making the city of Mathura unique within the universe. This proves
that there are undoubtedly innumerable demigods, but none of them are
independent of Kr  a. As stated in the Caitanya-caritiimrta, Kr va is the
supreme master, and all others are servants. So all the servants took the
opportunity of rendering service to Kr  a when He was personally present
within this universe. This example should be followed by all, especially
those who are Kr va conscious, for they should serve Kr l}a by their
respective abilities.
When the new city was fully constructed according to plan, Kr  a
transferred all the inhabitants of Mathura and entrusted SriBalarama as the
city father. After this He consulted with Balarama, and being garlanded
with lotus flowers, He came out of the city to meet Kalayavana, who had
already seized Mathura without taking up any weapons.
When Kr va came out of the city, Kalayavana, who had never seen
Kr  a before, saw Him to be extraordinarily beautiful, dressed in yellow
garments. Passing through His assembly of soldiers, Kr l}a appeared like
the moon in the sky passing through the assembled clouds. Kalayavana
was fortunate enough to see the lines of Srfvatsa, a particular impression
on the chest of Sri Kr !la, and the Kaustubha jewel which He was wearing.
Krsna Erects the Dvaraka Fort 335. . .
Kalayavana saw Him, however, in His Vi J!U form, with a well-built body,
with four hands, and eyes like newly blooming lotus petals. Kr r;Ia appeared
blissful, with a handsome forehead and beauitful face, with smiling restless
eyes and moving earrings. Before seeing Krwa, Kalayvana had heard about
Him from Narada, and now the descriptions of Narada were confirmed. He
noticed Kr f!a's specific marks and the j ewels on His chest, His beautiful
garland of lotus f1owers, His lotus-like eyes and similarly beautiful bodily
features. He concluded that this beautiful personality must be Vasudeva,
because every description of Narada's which he had heard previously was
substantiated by the presence of KHJ!a. Kalayavana was very much
astonished to see that He was passing through without any weapon in His
hands and without any chariot. He was simply walking on foot. Kalayavana
had come to fight with Krwa, and yet he had sufficient principles not to
take up any kind of weapon. He decided to fight with Him hand to hand.
Thus he prepared to capture Kr r;Ia and fight.
Kr  a, however, went ahead without looking at Kalayavana, and Kala
yavana began to follow Him with a desire to capture Him. But in spite of
all his swift running, he could not capture Kr f!a. Kr r;Ia cannot be cap
tured even by the mental speed attained by great yogis. He can be
captured only by devotional service, and Kalayavana was not practiced in
devotional service. He wanted to capture KHI;Ia, and as he could not do so
he was following him from b ehind.
Kalayavana b egan running very fast, and he was thinking, " N ow I am
nearer ; I will capture Him," but he could not. Kr r;Ia led him far away,
and He entered the cave of a hill. Kalayavana thought that Kr f!a was
trying to avoid fighting with him and was therefore taking shelter of the
cave. He began to chastise Him with the following words: "Oh You,
Kr r;Ia! I heard that You are a great hero born in the dynasty of Y adu, but
I see that You are verily running away from fightjng, like a coward. It is
not worthy of Your good name and family tradition." Kalayavana was
following, running very fast, but still he could not catch Kr f!a because he
was not freed from all contaminations of sinful life.
According to Vedic culture, anyone who does not live following the
regulative principles of life observed by the higher castes like the brah
marz,as, k§atriyas, vaisyas and even the laborer class is called mleccha. The
Vedic social situation is so planned that persons who are accepted as
siidras can gradually be elevated to the position of brahmar-as by the
cultural advancement known as samskara, or the purificatory process. The
version of the Vedic scriptures is that no one becomes a brahma!l-a or a
mleccha simply by birth; by birth everyone is accepted as siidra. One has
336 Kr )}a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
to elevate himself by the purificatory process to the stage of hrahminical
life. If he doesn't, if he degrades himself further, then he is called mleccha.
Kalayavana belonged to the class of mleccha and yavanas. He was contami
nated by sinful activities and could not approach Kr J}a. The principles
from which higher class men are restricted, namely illicit sex indulgence,
meat eating, gambling and intoxication, are part and parcel of the lives of
the mlecchas and yavanas. Being bound by such sinful activities one cannot
make any advancement in God realization. The Bhagavad-gitii •confirms
that only one who is completely freed from all sinful reactions can be
engaged in devotional service or Kr l}a consciousness.
When Kf l}a entered the cave of the hill, Kalayavana followed, chastising
Him with various harsh words. Kr l}a suddenly disappeared from the
demon's sight, hut Kalayavana followed and also entered the cave. The
first thing he saw was a man lying down asleep within the cave. Kalayavana
was very anxious to fight with Kr !la, and when he could not see Kr !la,
hut saw instead only a man lying down, he thought that Kr !la was sleeping
within this cave. Kalayavana was very puffed up and proud of his strength,
and he thought Kf l}a was avoiding the fight. Therefore, he very strongly
kicked the sleeping man, thinking him to be Kr J}a. The sleeping man had
been lying down for a very long time. When he was awakened by the
kicking of Kalayavana, he immediately o pened his eyes and began to look
around in all directions. At last he began to see Kalayavana, who was
standing nearby. This man was untimely awakened and therefore very
angry, and when he looked upon Kalayavana in his angry mood , rays of
fire emanated from his eyes, and Kalayavana burned into ashes within a
moment.
Thus ends the Bhak tivedanta purport of the Fo rty-ninth Chapter of
Kr !la, "K[§!ta Erects the Dviirakii Fort. "
'"' u_ /-:r '- /\/
---,1
'j------
  1 ; , )t
'   ); · L   · ..   . I l, .  J
' -
I . . ;
) .
50 I Deliverance of Mucukunda
When Maharaj a Parik it heard this incident of Kalayavana's being burned
to ashes, he inquired about the sleeping man from Sukadeva Gosvami:
"Who was he? Why was he sleeping there? H ow had he achieved so much
power that instantly, by his glance, Kalayavana was burned to ashes? H ow
did he happen to be lying down in the cave of the hill? " Many questions
were put before Sukadeva Gosvami, and Sukadeva also answered , as
follows.
"My dear King, this person was born in the very great family of King
Ik vaku , in which L ord Ramacandra was also born, and he happened to
be the son of a great king known as Mandhat . H e himself was also a great
soul and was known popularly as Mucukunda. King Mucukunda was a very
strict follower of the Vedic principles of brahminical culture, and he was
truthful to his promise. He was so powerful that even demigods like lndra
and others used to ask him to please help in fighting with the demons, and
as such, he often fought against the demons to protect the demigods."
The commander-in-chief of the demigods, known as Karttikeya, was
satisfied with the fighting of King Mucukunda, but once he asked that the
King, having taken too much trouble in fighting with the demons, retire
from fighting and take rest. The commander-in-chief, Karttikeya, addressed
King Mucukunda, "My dear King, you have sacrificed everything for the
sake of the demigods. You had a very nice kingdom undisturbed by any
kind of enemy. Y ou left that kingdom , you neglected your opulence and
possessions, and you never cared for fulfillment of your personal ambition.
Due to your long absence from your kingdom while fighting with the
demons on behalf of the demigods, your family, your children, your
relatives and your ministers have all passed away in due course of time.
Time and tide wait for no living man. N ow even if you retire to your home,
you will find that no . one is living there. The influence of time is very
337
338 Kf  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
strong; all your relatives have passed away in due course of time. Time is
so strong and powerful because it is a representation of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead; time is therefore stronger than the strongest. By
the influence of time, changes in subtle things can be effected without any
difficulty. No one can check the process of time. As an animal tamer
tames the animals according to his own will, so time also enters things
according to its own will. None can supersede the arrangement made by
the supreme time."
Thus addressing Mucukunda, the demigods requested him to ask for
any kind of benediction he might be pleased with, excepting the benedic
tion of liberation. Liberation cannot be awarded by any living entity except
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vi  u. Therefore another name of
Lord Vi  u or Kr  a is Mukunda, He who can award liberation.
King Mucukunda had not slept for many, many years. He was engaged
in the duty of fighting, and therefore he was very tired. So when the
demigod offered benediction, Mucukunda simply thought of sleeping. He
replied as follows: "My dear Karttikeya, the best of the demigods, I want
to sleep now, and I want from you the following benediction. Grant me
the power to burn, by my mere glance, anyone to ashes who tries to
disturb my sleeping and awakens me untimely. Please give me this bene
diction." The demigod agreed and also gave him the benediction that he
would be able to take complete rest. Then King Mucukunda entered the
cave of the mountain.
On the strength of the benediction of Karttikeya, Kalayavana was burnt
into ashes simply by Mucukunda's glancing at him. When the incident was
over, Kr  a came before King Mucukunda. Krwa had actually entered the
cave to deliver King Mucukunda from his austerity, but He did not first
appear before him. He arranged that first Kalayavana should come before
him. That is the way of the activities of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead; He does one thing in such a way that many other purposes are
served. He wanted to deliver King Mucukunda, who was sleeping in the
cave, and at the same time He wanted to kill Kalayavana, who had
attacked Mathura city. By this action He served all purposes.
When Lord Kr  a appeared before Mucukunda, the King saw Him
dressed in a yellow garment, His chest marked with the symbol of Srivatsa,
and the Kaustubha-mar:i hanging around His neck. Kr  a appeared before
him with four hands, as Vi  m-murti, with a garland called vaijayanti
hanging from His neck down to His knees. He was looking very lustrous,
His face was very beautifully smiling, and He had nice jeweled earrings in
both His ears. Kr  a appeared more beautiful than a human can conceive.
Deliverance of Mucuknnda 339
Not only did He appear in this feature, but He glanced over Mucukunda
with great splendor, attracting the King's mind. Although He was the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the oldest of all, He looked like a fresh
young boy, and His movement was just like that of a free deer. He appeared
extremely powerful; His excellence in power is so great that every human
being should be afraid of Him.
When King Mucukunda saw Kr§ a's magnificent features, he wondered
about His identity, and with great humility he began to inquire from the
Lord: "My dear Lord, may I inquire how it is that You happened to be in
the cave of this mountain? Who are You? I can see that Your feet are just
like soft lotus flowers. How could You walk in this forest full of thorns
and hedges? I am simply surprised to see this! Are You not, therefore, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the most powerful amongst the
powerful? Are You not the original source of all illumination and fire? Can
I consider You one of the great demigods, like the sun, the moon, or
Indra, King of heaven? Or are You the predominating deity of any other
planet?"
Mucukunda knew well that every higher planetary system has a pre
dominating deity. He was not ignorant like modern men who consider that
this earthly planet is full of living entities and all others are vacant. The
inquiry from Mucukunda about Krwa's being the predominating deity of
a planet unknown to him is quite appropriate. Because he was a pure
devotee of the Lord, King Mucukunda could immediately understand that
Lord Kr§ a, who had appeared before him in such an opulent feature,
could not be one of the predominating deities in the material planets. He
must be the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kf§ a, who has His many
Vi§ U forms. He therefore took Him to be Puru ottama, Lord Vi  u. He
could see also that the dense darkness within the mountain cave had
already been dissipated due to the Lord's presence; therefore He could not
be other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He knew very well
that wherever the Lord is personally present by His transcendental name,
quality, form, etc., there cannot be any darkness of ignorance. He is like a
lamp placed in the darkness; He immediately illuminates a dark place.
King Mucukunda became very much anxious to know about the identity
of Lord Kr§ a, and therefore he said, "0 best of human beings, if You
think that I am fit to know about Your identity, then kindly tell me who
You are. What is Your parentage? What is Your occupational duty, and
what is Your family tradition?" King Mucukunda thought it wise, however,
to identify himself to the Lord; otherwise he had no right to ask the
Lord's identity. Etiquette is such that a person of less importance cannot
340 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
ask the identity of a person of higher importance without first disclosing
his own identity. King Mucukunda therefore informed Lord KH a, "My
dear Lord, I must inform You of my identification. I belong to the most
celebrated dynasty of King Ik vaku, but personally I am not as great as my
forefather. My name is Mucukunda. My father's name wasMandha.t , and
my grandfather's name was Yuvanasva, the great king. I was very much
fatigued due to not resting for many thousands of years, and because of
this all my bodily limbs were flattened and almost incapable of acting. In
order to revive my energy, I was taking rest in this solitary cave, but I have
been awakened by some unknown man who has forced me to wake up
although I was not willing to do so. For such an offensive act, this person
has been burnt into ashes simply by my glancing over him. Fortunately,
now I can see You in Your grand and beautiful features. I think, therefore,
that You are the cause of killing my enemy. My dear Lord, I must admit
that due to the effulgence of Your body, unbearable to my eyes, I cannot
see You properly. I can fully realize that by the influence of Your efful
gence my powerful potency has been diminished. I can understand that
You are quite fit for being worshiped by all living entities. "
Seeing King Mucukunda so anxious to know about His identity, Lord
Kr  1a began to answer smilingly, as follows: "My dear King, it is practically
impossible to tell about My birth, appearance, disappearance and activities.
Perhaps you know that My incarnation Anantadeva has unlimited mouths,
and for an unlimited time he has been trying to narrate fully about My
name, fame, qualities, activities, appearance, disappearance and incarnation,
but still he has not been able to finish. Therefore, it is not possible to
know exactly how many names and forms I possess. It may be possible for
a material scientist to estimate the number of atomic particles which make
up this earthly planet, but the scientist cannot enumerate My unlimited
names, forms and activities. There are many great sages and saintly persons
who are trying to make a list of My different forms and activities, yet they
have failed to make a complete list. But since you are so anxious to know
about Me, I may inform you.that presently I have appeared on this planet
just to annihilate the demoniac principles of the people in general and to
reestablish the religious principles enjoined in the Vedas. I have been
invited for this purpose by Brahma, the superintending deity of this
universe, and thus I have now appeared in the dynasty of the Yadus as one
of their 'family members. I have specifically taken My birth as the son of
Vasudeva in the Yadu Dynasty, and people therefore know Me as Vasu
deva, the son of Vasudeva. You may also know that I have killed Kamsa,
who was in a previous life known as Kalanemi, as well as Pralambasura
Deliverance of Mucukunda 341
and many other demons. They have acted as My enemies and have been
killed by Me. The demon who was present before you also acted as My
enemy, and you have very kindly burned him into ashes by glancing over
him. My dear King Mucukunda, you are My great devotee, and just to
show you My causelet::s mercy, I have appeared in this form. I am very
affectionately inclined toward My devotees, and in your previous life,
before your present condition, you ac.ted as My great devotee and prayed
for My causeless mercy. I have, therefore, come to see you to fulfill your
desire. Now you can see Me to your heart's content. My dear King, now
you can ask from Me any benediction that you wish, and I am prepared to
fulfill your desire. It is my eternal principle that anyone who comes under
My shelter must have all his desires fulfilled by My grace."
When Lord Kr t;J.a ordered King Mucukunda to ask a benediction from
Him, the King became very joyful, and he immediately remembered the
prediction of Gargamuni, who had foretold long before that in the twenty
eighth millennium of Vaivasvata Manu, Lord Kf l).a would appear on this
planet. As soon as he remembered this prediction, he began to understand
that the Supreme Person, Narayal).a, was present before Him as Lord
Kr t;J.a. He immediately fell down at His lotus feet and began to pray as
follows.
"My dear Lord, 0 Supreme Personality of Godhead, I can understand
that all living entities on this planet are illusioned by Your external
energy and are enamored of the illusory satisfaction of sense gratification.
Being fully engaged in illusory activities, they are reluctant to worship
Your lotus feet, and because they are unaware of the benefits of surren
dering unto Your lotus feet they are subjected to various miserable
conditions of material existence. They are foolishly attached to so-called
society, friendship and love, which simply produce different kinds of
miserable conditions. Illusioned by Your external energy, everyone, both
man and woman, is attached to this material existence, and all are engaged
in cheating one another in a great society of the cheaters and the cheated .
These foolish persons do not know how fortunate they are to have
obtained this human form of life, and they are reluctant to worship Your
lotus feet. By the influence of Your external energy, they are simply
attached to the glare of material activities. They are attached to so-called
society, friendship and love like dumb animals that have fallen into a dark
well." The example of a dark well is given because in the fields there are
many wells, unused for years and covered over by grass, and the poor
animals, without knowing of them, fall into them, and unless they are
rescued, they die. Being captivated by a few blades of grass, the animals
342 Kr J?a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
fall into a dark well and meet death. Similarly, foolish persons, without
knowing the importance of the human form of life, spoil it simply for
sense gratification and die unnecessarily, without any useful purpose.
"My dear Lord, I am not an exception to this universal law of material
nature. I am also one of those foolish persons who has wasted his time for
nothing. And my position is especially difficult. On account of my being
situated in the royal order, I was more puffed up than ordinary persons.
An ordinary man thinks of becoming the proprietor of his body or of his
family, but I began to think in that way on a larger scale. I wanted to be
the master of the whole world, and as I became puffed up with ideas of
sense gratification, my bodily concept of life became stronger and stronger.
My attachment for home, wife and children, for money and for supremacy
over the world, became more and more acute ; in fact, it was limitless. So I
remained always attached to thoughts of my material living conditions.
" Therefore , my dear Lord, I wasted so much of my valuable lifetime
without any benefit. My misconception of life having been intensified, I
began to think of this material body, which is just a bag of flesh and bones,
as the all in all, and in my vanity I was like a dog who believes that he has
become the king of human society. In this misconception of bodily life, I
began to travel all over the world, accompanied by my military strength
soldiers, charioteers, elephants and horses. Assisted by many commanders
and puffed up by power, I could not trace out Your Lordship, who is
always sitting within my heart as the most intimate friend. I did not care
for You, and this was the fault of my so-called exalted material condition.
I think that, like me, all living creatures are careless about spiritual realiza
tion and are always full of anxieties, thinking, 'What is to be done?' 'What
is next?' But because we are strongly bound by material desires, we
continue to remain in craziness.
"Yet in spite of our being so absorbed in material thought, inevitable
time, which is only a form of Yourself, is always careful about its duty,
and as soon as the alloted time is over, Your Lordship immediately ends
all the activities of our material dreams. As the time factor, You end all
our activities, as the hungry blacksnake swiftly swallows up a small rat
without any leniency. Due to the action of cruel time, the royal body
which was always decorated with gold ornaments during life and which
moved on a chariot drawn by beautiful horses or on the back of an
elephant nicely decorated with golden ornaments, and which was adver
tised as the king of human society-that same royal body decomposes
under the influence of inevitable time and becomes fit for being eaten by
worms and insects or being turned into ashes or the stool of an animal.
Deliverance of Mucukunda 343
This beautiful body may be nice while in the living condition, but after
death even the body of a king is eaten by an animal and therefore turns
into stool or is cremated in the crematorium and turned into ashes or is
put into an earthly grave where different kinds of worms and insects are
produced out of it.
"My dear Lord, not only do we become under the full control of this
inevitable time after death, but also while living, in a different way. For
example, I may be a powerful king, and yet when I come home after
conquering over the world I become subjected to many material conditions.
It may be that when I come back after being victorious all subordinate
kings come and offer their respects, but as soon as I enter into the inner
section of my palace, I myself become an instrument in the hands of the
queens, and for sense gratification I have to fall down at the feet of women.
The material way of life is so complicated that before taking the enjoy
ment of material life one has to work so hard that there is scarcely an
opportunity for enjoying. And to attain the youthful condition with all
material facilities one has to undergo severe austerities and penances and
become elevated to the heavenly planets. If one gets the opportunity of
taking birth in a very rich or royal family, even then in that condition he
is always anxious to maintain the status quo and prepare for the next life
by performing various kinds of sacrifices and by distributing charity. Even
in the royal condition of life one is not only full of anxieties because of
political administration, but he is also in anxiety over being elevated to
heavenly planets.
"It is therefore very difficult to get out of the material entanglement,
but somehow or other if one is favored by You, by Your mercy only he is
given the opportunity to associate with a pure devotee. That is the be
ginning point of liberation from the entanglement of material conditional
life. My dear Lord, only by the association of pure devotees is one en
trapped by Y our Lordship, who is the controller of both the material and
spiritual existences. You are the supreme goal of all pure devotees, and by
association with pure devotees one can develop his dormant love for You.
Therefore, development of Krwa consciousness in the association of pure
devotees is the cause of liberation from this material entanglement.
"My dear Lord, You are so merciful that in spite of my being reluctant
to associate with Your great devotees You have shown Your extreme
mercy upon me as a result of my slight contact with a pure devotee like
Gargamuni. By Your causeless mercy only have I lost all my material
opulences, my kingdom and my family. I do not think that I could have
gotten rid of all these entanglements without Your causeless mercy. Kings
344 Kr J..la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and emperors accept the life of austerity to forget the royal condition of
life, but by Your special causeless mercy I have already been bereft of the
royal condition. Other kings exert themselves to get out of the attachment
of kingdom and family by acceptance of the hardships of renunciation,
but by Your mercy I do not need to become a mendicant or to practice
renunciation.
"My dear Lord, I therefore pray that I may simply be engaged in
rendering transcendental loving service unto Your lotus feet, which is the
ambition of the pure devotees who are freed from all kinds of material
contamination. You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and You
can offer me anything I want, including liberation. But who is such a
foolish person that after pleasing You he would ask from You something
which might be the cause of entanglement in this material world? I do not
think any sane man would ask such a benediction from You. I therefore
surrender unto You because You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
You are the Supersoul living in everyone's heart, and You are the imper
sonal Brahman effulgence. Moreover, You are also this material world,
because this material world is only the manifestation of Your external
energy. Therefore, from any angle of vision, You are the supreme shelter
for everyone. Everyone, either in the material plane or in the spiritual
plane, must take shelter under Your lotus feet. I therefore submit unto
You, my Lord. For many, many births I have been suffering from the
threefold miseries of this material existence, and I am now tired of it. I
have simply been impelled by my senses, and I was never satisfied. I
therefore take shelter of Your lotus feet, which are the source of all
peaceful conditions of life and which can eradicate all kinds of lamentation
caused by material contamination. My dear Lord, You are the Supersoul of
everyone, and You can understand everything. Now I am free from all
contamination of material desire. I do not wish to enj oy this material
world, nor do I wish to take advantage of merging into Your spiritual
effulgence, nor do I wish to meditate upon Your localized aspect of
Paramatma, for I know that simply by taking shelter of You, I shall become
completely peaceful and undisturbed."
On hearing this statement of King Mucukunda, Lord Kfwa replied, "My
dear King, I am very much pleased with your statement. You have been
the King of all the lands on this planet, but I am surprised to find that
your mind is now freed from all material contamination. You are now fit
to execute devotional service. I am most pleased to see that although I
offered you the opportunity of asking from Me any kind of benediction,
you did not take advantage of asking for material benefit. I can understand
Deliverance of Mucukunda 345
that your mind is now fixed in Me, and it is not disturbed by any material
fault.
"The material qualities are three, namely goodness, passion and igno
rance. When one is placed in the mixed material qualities of passion and
ignorance, he is impelled by various kinds of dirtiness and lusty desires to
try to find comfort in this material world. When he is situated in the
material quality of goodness, he tries to purify himself by performing
various kinds of penances and austerities. When one reaches the platform
of a real brahmara, he aspires to merge into the existence of the Lord,
but when one desires simply to render service unto the lotus feet of the
Lord, that is transcendental to all these three qualities. The pure Kr  a
conscious person is therefore always free from all material qualities. My
dear King, I offered to give you any kind of benediction, just to test how
much you have advanced in devotional service. Now I can see that you are
on the platform of the pure devotees because your mind is not disturbed
by any kind of greedy or lusty desires of this material world. The yogis
who are trying to elevate themselves by controlling the senses and who
meditate upon Me by practicing the breathing exercise of prap,ayama are
not so thoroughly freed from material desires. It has been seen in several
cases that as soon as there is allurement, such yogis again come down to
the material platform."
The vivid example verifying this statement is Visvamitra Muni. Visva
mitra Muni was a great yogi who practiced prarayama, a breathing
exercise, but still when he was visited by Menaka, a society woman of the
heavenly planet, he lost all control and begot in her a daughter named
Sakuntala. But the pure devotee Haridasa Thakur was never disturbed,
even when all such allurements were offered by the prostitutes.
"My dear King," Lord Kr  la continued, "I therefore give you the
special benediction that you will always think of Me. Thus you will be
able to traverse this material world freely, without being contaminated by
the qualities." This statement of the Lord confirms that a person in true
Kr !la consciousness, engaged in the transcendental loving service of the
Lord under the direction of the spiritual master, is never subjected to the
contamination of material qualities.  
"My dear King," the Lord said, "because you are a k§atriya, you have
committed the offense of slaughtering animals, both in hunting and in
political engagements. To become purified, just engage yourself in bhakti
yoga practice and always keep your mind absorbed in Me. Very soon you
will be freed from all reactions to such sordid activities." In this statement
it appears that although the k§atriyas are allowed to kill animals in the
346 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
hunting process, they are not freed from the contamination of other
sinful reactions. Therefore it does not matter whether one is k§atriya,
vaiSya, or briihmar-a; everyone is recommended to take sannyiisa at the end
of life, to engage himself completely in the service of the Lord and thus
become freed from all sinful reactions of his past life.
The Lord then assured King Mucukunda, "In your next life you will
take yt)ur birth as a first-class Vai !lava, the best of briihmar-as, and in that
life your only business will be to engage yourself in My transcendental
service." The Vai !lava is the first-class briihmar-a, because one who has not
acquired the qualification of a bona fide briihmar-a cannot come to the
platform of a V ai !lava. When one comes to the platform of a V ai !lava, he
is completely engaged in welfare activities for all living entities. The
highest welfare activity for living entities is the preaching of Kr !la
consciousness. It is stated herein that those who are specifically favored by
the Lord can become absolutely Kr !la conscious and be engaged in the
preaching work of the Vaiwava philosophy.
Thus ends the Bhak tivedanta purport of the Fiftieth Chapter of Kr !la,
"Deliverance of Mucukunda. "
5 1 I Krsna, the Ranchor• • •
When Mucukunda , the celebrated descendant of the Ik vaku dynasty,
was favored by Lord Kr !la, he circumambulated the Lord within the cave
and then came out. On coming out of the cave, Mucukunda saw that the
stature of the human species had surprisingly been reduced to pigmy size.
Similarly, the trees had also far reduced in size, and Mucukunda could
immediately understand that the current age was Kali-yuga. Therefore,
without diverting his attention, he began to travel north. Eventually he
reached the mountain known as Gandhamadana. It appeared there were
many trees on this mountain, such as sandalwood and other flower trees,
the flavor of which made anyone j oyful who reached them . He decided to
remain in that Gandhamadana Mountain region in order to execute auster
ities and penances for the rest of his life. It appears that this place is
situated in the northernmost part of the Himalayan Mountains, where the
abode of Nara-N araya!la is situated. This place is still existing and is called
Badarikasrama. In Badarikasrama he engaged himself in the worship of
Lord Kr !la, forgetting all pain and pleasure and the other dualities of this
material world. Lord Kr !la also returned to the vicinity of the city of
Mathura and began to fight with the soldiers of Kalayavana and kill them
one after another. After this, He collected all the booty from the dead
bodies, and under His direction, it was loaded on bullock carts by big men
and brought back to D varaka.
Meanwhile, J arasandha again attacked Mathura, this time with bigger
divisions of soldiers, numbering twenty-three ak§auhi[liS.
. Lord Sri Kr !la wanted to save Mathura from the eighteenth attack of
the great military divisions of King J arasandha. In order to prevent further
killing of soldiers and to attend to other important business, Lord Kr !la
left the battlefield without fighting. Actually He was not at all afraid, but
He pretended to be an ordinary human being frightened by the immense
347
348 Kr  a, the Supre me Personality of G odhead
quantity of soldiers and resources of Jarasandha. Without any weapons
He left the battlefield. Although His lotus feet were as soft as the petals of
the lotus flower , He proceeded for a very long distance on foot.
This time, Jarasandha thought that Kr  ta and Balarama were very much
afraid of His military strength and were fleeing from the battlefield. He
began to follow Them with all his chariots, horses and infantry. He thought
Kr  a and Balarama to be ordinary human beings, and he was trying to
measure the activities of the Lord. Kr  1a is known _as Ranchor, which
means "one who has left the battlefield. " In India, especially in Guj arat,
there are many temples of Kr  a which are known as temples of Ranchorji.
Ordinarily , if a king leaves the battlefield without fighting he is called a
coward, but when Kr  a enacts this pastime , leaving the battlefield without
fighting, He is worshiped by the devotee. A demon always tries to measure
the opulence of Krwa, whereas the devotee never tries to measure His
strength and o pulence, but always surrenders unto Him and worships Him.
By following the footsteps of pure devotees we can know that Kr  a, the
Ranchorji, did not leave the battlefield because He was afraid, but because
He had some other purpose. The purpose, as it will be revealed , was to
attend to a confidential letter sent by Rukmitti, His future first wife. The
act of Kr va 's leaving the battlefield is a display of one of His six opu
lences. Kr  a is the supreme powerful, the supreme wealthy, the supreme
famous, the supreme wise , the supreme beautiful ; similarly He is the
supreme renouncer. Srimad-Bhiigavatam clearly states that He left the
battlefield in spite of having ample military strength. Even without His
militia, however, He alone would have been sufficient to defeat the
army of J arasandha , as He had done seventeen times before. Therefore,
His leaving the battlefield is an example of His supermost opulence of
renunciation.
After traversing a very long distance , the brothers pretended to become
very tired. To mitigate Their weariness They climbed up a very high
mountain several miles above sea level. This mountain was called Pravar a a
due to constant rain. The peak was always covered with clouds sent by
lndra. Jarasandha took it for granted that the two brothers were afraid of
his military power and had hidden Themselves at the top of the mountain.
First he tried to find Them, searching for a long time, but when he failed
he decided to trap and kill Them by setting fires around the peak. He
therefore surrounded the peak with oil and set it on fire. As the blaze
spread more and more, Kr  ta and Balarama jumped from the top of the
mountain down to the ground-a distance of eighty-eight miles . Thus, while
the peak was burning u p , Kr !la and Balarama escaped without being seen
Kr  a, the Ranchor 349
by Jarasandha. Jarasandha concluded that the two brothers had been
burned to ashes and that there was no need of further fighting. Thinking
himself successful in his efforts, he left the city of Mathura and returned
to his home in the kingdom of Magadha. Gradually Kpgta and Balarama
reached the city of Dvaraka, which was surrounded on all sides by the sea.
Following this, Sri Balarama married Revati, daughter of King Raivata,
ruler of the Anarta province. This is explained in the Ninth Canto of
Srimad-Bhiigavatam. After the marriage of Baladeva, Kr l!a married Ruk
mit;i. Rukmit;i was the daughter of King Bhi maka, ruler of the province
known as Vidarbha. Just as Kr l!a is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Vasudeva, Rukmit;i is the supreme goddess of fortune, Maha-Lak mi.
According to the authority of Caitanya-caritiimrta, the expansion of Kr l!a
and Sri Radharai,li is simultaneous; Krwa expands Himself into various
Vi ru-tattva forms, and Srimati Radharal}i expands Herself into various
sakti-tattva forms by Her internal potency, as multi-forms of the goddess
of fortune.
According to Vedic convention, there are eight kinds of marriages. In
the first-class marriage system, the parents of the bride and bridegroom
arrange the marriage date. Then, in royal style, the bridegroom goes to the
house of the bride, and in the presence of briihmaras, priests and relatives,
the bride is given in charity to the bridegroom. Besides this, there are other
systems, such as the gandharva and riik asa marriages. Rukmil}i was married
to Kr l!a in the riik asa style because she was kidnapped by Him in the
presence of His many rivals, like Sisupala, Jarasandha, Salva 'and others.
While Rukmil}i was being given in charity to Sisupala, she was snatched
from the marriage arena by Kr l!a, exactly as Garw_la snatched the pot of
nectar from the demons. Rukmil}i, the only daughter of King Bhi maka,
was exquisitely beautiful. She was known as Ruciranana, which means
"one who has a beautiful face, expanding like a lotus flower.''
Devotees of Kr t;a are always anxious to hear about the transcendental
activities of the Lord. His activities of fighting, kidnapping and running
away from the battlefield are all transcendental, being on the absolute
platform , and devotees take a transcendental interest in hearing of them.
The pure devotee does not make the distinction that some activities of the
Lord should be heard and others should be avoided. There is, however, a
class of so-called devotees known as prakrta sahajiyii who are very in
terested in hearing about Kr l!a's riisa-lilii with the gopis, but not about His
fighting activities with His enemies. They do not know that His bellicose
activities and His friendly activities with the gopis are equally transcen
dental, being on the absolute platform. The transcendental pastimes of
350 'Kf !la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
KH a described in the Srimad-Bhiigavatam are relished by pure devotees
through submissive aural reception. They do not reject even a drop.
The story of Kr  a's marriage with Rukmi i is described as follows.
The King of Vidarbha, Maharaja Bhi maka, was a very qualified and
devoted prince. He had five sons and only one daughter. The first son was
known as Rukmi; the second, Rukmaratha; the third, Rukmabahu ; the
fourth and youngest, Rukmake8a; and the fifth, Rukmamali. The brothers
had one young sister, Rukmi i. She was beautiful and chaste and was
meant to be married to Lord Kr  a. Many saintly persons and sages like
Narada Muni and others used to visit the palace of King Bhi maka.
Naturally Rukmi i had a chance to talk with them, and in this way she
obtained information about Kr  a. She was informed about the six
opulences of Kr  a, and simply by hearing about Him, she desired to
surrender herself to His lotus feet and become His wife. Kr  a had also
heard of Rukmi i. She was the reservoir of all transcendental qualities:
intelligence, liberal-mindedness, exquisite beauty and righteous behavior.
Kr  a therefore decided that she was fit to be His wife. All of the family
members and relatives of King Bhi maka decided that Rukmi i should be
given in marriage to Kr  a. However her elder brother, Rukmi, despite
the desire of the others, arranged for her marriage with Sisupala, a
determined enemy of Kr  a. When the black-eyed, beautiful Rukmi i
heard the settlement, she immediately became very morose. However,
being a king's daughter, she understood political diplomacy and decided
that there was no use in simply becoming morose. Some steps should be
taken immediately. After some deliberation, she decided to send a message
to Kr  a, and so that she might not be deceived, she selected a qualified
briihmar-a as her messenger. Such a qualified b riihmar-a is always truthful
and is a devotee of Vi  u. Without delay, the briihmar-a was sent to
Dvaraka.
Reaching the gate of Dvaraka, the b riihmar-a informed the doorkeeper of
his arrival, and the doorkeeper led him to the place where Kr  a was sitting
on a golden throne. Since the briihmm;w had the opportunity of being
Rukmi i's messenger, he was fortunate enough to see the Supreme Person
ality of Godhead, Kr  a,who is the original cause of all causes. A b riihmar-a
is the spiritual teacher of all the social divisions. Lord Sri Kr  a, in order to
teach everyone the Vedic etiquette of how to respect a briihmarz.a, imme
diately got up and offered him His throne. When the briihmar-a was seated
on the golden throne, Lord Sri Kr  a began to worship him exactly in the
manner in which the demigods worship Kr  a. In this way, He taught every
one that worshiping His devotee is more valuable than worshiping Himself.
Kr JJa, the Ranchor 351
In due time, the briihmw;w took his bath, accepted his meals and took
to rest on a bedstead completely bedecked with soft silk. As he was
resting, Lord Sri Kr  a silently approached and, with great respect, put
the briihmm;w 's legs on His lap and began to massage them. In this way,
Kr  a appeared before the briihmmya and said, "My dear briihma[ta, I hope
that you are executing the religious principles without any difficulty and
that your mind is always in a peaceful condition." Different classes of
people in the social system are engaged in various professions, and when
one inquires as to the well-being of a particular person, it must be done
on the basis of that person's occupation. Therefore, when one inquires as
to the welfare of a briihmwya, the questions should be worded according
to his condition of life so as not to disturb him. A peaceful mind is the
basis for becoming truthful, clean, equipoised, self-controlled and tolerant.
Thus by attaining knowledge and knowing its practical application in life,
one becomes convinced about the Absolute Truth. The briihmwya knew
Kr JJa to be the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and still he accepted
the respectful service of the Lord on the grounds of Vedic social conven
tion. Lord Sri Krwa was playing just like a human being. Belonging to the
k atriya division of the social system, and being a young hoy, it was
His duty to show respect to such a briihmar;w.
Lord Krwa continued : "0 best of all the briihmar;ws, you should
always remain satisfied because if a briihmar;w is always self-satisfied he
will not deviate from his prescribed duties; and simply by sticking to
one's prescribed duties, everyone, especially the briihmar-as, can attain the
highest perfection of all desires. Even if a person is as opulent as the King
of heaven, Indra, if he is not satisfied he inevitably has to transmigrate
from one planet to another. Such a person can never be happy under any
circumstances; but if a person's mind is satisfied, even if he is bereft of
his high position, he can be happy living anywhere and everywhere."
This instruction of Kr lJa to the briihmau,a is very significant. The
purport is that a true briihmarta should not be disturbed in any situation.
In this modern age of Kali-yuga, the so-called bnihmar-as have accepted
the abominable position of the sudras or less than sudras and still want to
pass as qualified briihmar-as. Actually, a qualified briihmar-a always sticks
to his own duties and never accepts those of a sudra or of one less than a
sudra. It is advised in the authorized scriptures that a briihmar-a may,
under awkward circumstances, accept the profession of a k§atriya or even
a vaiSya, but never is he to accept the profession of a sudra. Lord Kr JJa
declared that a briihmar-a should never be disturbed by any adverse
conditions of life if he scrupulously sticks to his religious principles. In
352 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
conclusion, Lord Sri Kr  a said: "I offer My respectful obeisances to the
briihmm;ws and V ai  avas, because the briihmar;tas are always self-satisfied,
and the V ai  avas are always engaged in actual welfare activities for the
human society. They are the best friends of the people in general; both are
free from false egoism and are always in a peaceful condition of mind."
Lord Krwa then desired to know about the rulers (k§atriyas) in the
briihmarya's kingdom, so He inquired whether the citizens of the kingdom
were all happy. A king's qualification is judged by the temperament of the
people in the kingdom. If they are very happy in all respects, it is to be
understood that the king is honest and executing his duties rightly. Kr pa
said that the king in whose kingdom the citizens are happy is very dear to
Him. Of course Kr pa could understand that the briihmmy.a had come with
a confidential message; therefore he said, "If you have no objection, I am
giving you permission to speak about your mission." Thus, being very
satisfied by these transcendental pastimes with the Lord, the briihmar;ta
narrated the whole story of his mission to come and see Kr pa. He got out
the letter which Rukmi i had written to Kr  a and said, "These are the
words of Princess Rukmi i: 'My dear Krwa, 0 infallible and most
beautiful one, any human being who happens to hear about Your transcen
dental form and pastimes immediately absorbs through his ears Your
name, fame and qualities; thus all his material pangs subside, and he fixes
Your form in his heart. Through such transcendental love for You, he sees
You always within himself; and by this process all his desires become ful
filled. Similarly, I have heard of Your transcendental qualities. I may be
shameless in expressing myself so directly, but You have captivated me
and taken my heart. You may suspect that I am an unmarried girl, young
in age, and may doubt my steadiness of character, but my dear Mukunda,
You are the supreme lion among the human beings, the supreme person
among persons. Any girl, although not yet out of her home, or any woman
who may be of the highest chastity, would desire to marry You, being
captivated by Your unprecedented character, knowledge, o pulence and
position. I know that You are the husband of the goddess of fortune and
that You are very kind toward Your devotees; therefore I have decided to
become Your eternal maidservant. My dear Lord, I dedicate my life and
soul unto Your lotus feet. I have accepted Your Lordship as my selected
husband, and I therefore request You to accept me as Your wife. You are
the supreme powerful, 0 lotus-eyed one. Now I belong to You. If that
which is enjoyable for the lion to eat is taken away by the jackal, it will
be a ludicrous affair; therefore I request You to immediately take care
of me before I am taken away by Sisupala and other princes like him.
K{  a, the Ranchor 353
My dear Lord, in my previous life I may have done public welfare work
like digging wells and growing trees, or pious activities such as performing
ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices and serving the superior spiritual
master, the briihmm:zas and Va  avas. By these activities, perhaps I have
pleased the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Naraya a. If this is so, then
I wish that You, Lord Kr  a, the brother of Lord Balarama, would please
come here and catch hold of my hand so that I may not be touched by
Sisupala and his company."'
Rukmi \i's marriage with Sisupala was already settled ; therefore she
suggested that Kr  a kidnap her so that this might be changed. This sort
of marriage, in which the girl is kidnapped by force, is known as riiksasa
and is practiced among the k§atriyas, or the administrative, martial
spirited type of men. Because her marriage was already arranged to take
place the next day, Rukmi l suggested that Kr  a come there incognito to
kidnap her and then fight with Sisupala and his allies like the King of
Magadha. Knowing that no one could conquer Kr  a and that He would
certainly emerge victorious, she addressed Him as Ajita-the unconquerable.
RukmiJ?I told Kr  a not to be concerned that many of her family members,
including other women, might be wounded or even killed if the fighting
took place within the palace. As the king of a country thinks of diplomatic
ways to achieve his object, similarly Rukmi 1, being the daughter of a
king, was diplomatic in suggesting how this unnecessary and undesirable
killing could be avoided.
She explained that it was the custom of her family to visit the temple
of the goddess Durga, their family deity, before a marriage. (The k§atriya
kings were mostly staunch V ai J?avas, worshiping Lord V i  u in either
the Radha-Kr§ a or Lak§mi-Narayal}a form; still, for their material welfare,
they used to worship the goddess Durga. They never made the mistake,
however, of accepting the demigods as the Supreme Lord on the level of
Vi§ru-tattva, as did some of the less intelligent men.) In order to avoid
the unnecessary killing of her relatives, Rukmivl suggested that it would
be easiest for Him to kidnap her while she was either going from the
palace to the temple or else while she was returning home.
She also explained to Kr§va why she was so anxious to be married to
Him, even though her marriage was to take place with Sisupala, who was
also qualified, being the son of a great king. RukmiJ?I said that she did not
think anyone was greater than K § a, not even Lord Siva, who is known
as Mahadeva, the greatest of all demigods. Lord Siva also seeks the pleasure
of Lord Kr§ a in order to be delivered from his entanglement in the quality
of ignorance within the material world. In spite of the fact that Lord
354 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Siva is the greatest of all great souls, mahiitmiis, he keeps on his head the
purifying water of the Ganges, which emanates from a hole in this material
universe made by the toe of Lord Vi pu. Lord Siva is in charge of the
material quality of ignorance, and in order to keep himself in a transcen
dental position, he always meditates on Lord Vi t;J.U. Therefore Rukmipi
knew very well that obtaining the favor of Kr pa was not an easy job. If
even Lord Siva must purify himself for this purpose, surely it would he
difficult for Rukmipi, who was only the daughter of a k atriya king. Thus
she desired to dedicate her life to observing severe austerities and penances,
such as fasting and going without bodily comforts. If it were not possible
in this lifetime to gain Kr pa's favor by these activities, she was prepared
to do the same lifetime after lifetime. In the Bhagavad-gitii it is said that
pure devotees of the Lord execute devotional service with great determina
tion. Such determination, as exhibited by Rukmi!lidevi, is the only price
for purchasing Kr pa's favor and is the way to ultimate success in Kr pa
consciOusness.
After explaining Rukmi idevi's statement to Kr pa, the briihmar.a said :
"My dear KHt;J.a, chief of the Yadu dynasty, I have brought this confiden
tial message for You from Rukmipi; now it is placed before You for
Your consideration. After due deliberation You can act as You please, ,hut
if You want to do something, You must do it immediately. There is not
much time left for action."
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Fifty-first Chapter of
Kn>t;J.a, "Kr r-a, the Ranchor. "
52 I Kr  a Kidnaps Rukmi i
After hearing Rukmi i''s statement , L ord Kr§ a was very pleased. He
immediately shook hands with the b riih mm;w and said : " My dear b riihma[ta,
I am very glad to hear that Rukmi i' is anxious to marry Me, since I am
also anxious to get her hand. My mind is always absorbed in the thought
of the daughter of Bhi§maka, and sometimes I cannot sleep at night because
I am thinking of her. I can understand that the marriage of Rukmi i' with
Sisupala has been arranged by her elder brother in a spirit of animosity
toward Me ; so I am determined to give a good lesson to all of these princes.
Just as fire is extracted and utilized after manipulating ordinary wood,
similarly, after dealing with these demoniac princes, I shall bring forth
Rukmi i, like fire, from their midst."
Kr§ a, upon being informed of the specific date of Rukmi l's marriage,
became anxious to leave immediately. He asked His driver, D aruka, to
harness the horses for His chariot and prepare to go to the kingdom of
Vidarbha. The driver , j ust after hearing this order , brought Kr§ a's four
special horses. The names and descriptions of these horses are mentioned
in the Padma Purii[ta. The first one , Saivya, was greenish; the second ,
Sugri'va, was grayish like ice ; the third , Meghapu§pa, was the color of a
new cloud ; and the last , Balahaka, was of ashen color. When the horses
were yoked and the chariot ready to go , Kr§ a helped the b riihmarta up
and gave him a seat by His side . I mmediately they started from D varaka
and within one night arrived at the province of V idarbha. The kingdom of
D varaka is situated in the western part of India, and V idarbha is situated
in the northern part. They are separated by a distance of not less than
1 ,000 miles, but the horses were so fast that they reached their destination,
a town called Ku ?ina, within one night , or at most , twelve hours.
King Bhi§maka was not very enthusiastic about handing his daughter
over to Sisupala, but he was obliged to accept the marriage settlement due
355
356 Kr l!a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
to his affectionate attachment for his eldest son, who had negotiated it. As
a matter of duty, he was decorating the city for the marriage ceremony
and was acting in great earnestness to make it very successful. Water was
sprinkled all over the streets, and the city was cleansed very nicely. Since
India is situated in the tropical zone, the atmosphere is always dry. Due to
this, dust always accumulates on the streets and roads; so they must be
sprinkled with water at least once a day, and in big cities like Calcutta,
twice a day. The roads of Ku!llJina were arranged with colored flags and
festoons, and gates were constructed at particular crossings. The whole city
was decorated very nicely. The beauty of the city was enhanced by the
inhabitants, both men and women, who were dressed in washed cloth,
decorated with sandalwood pulp, pearl necklaces and flower garlands.
Incense was burning everywhere, and fragrances like aguru scented the air.
Priests and brahmm;ws were sumptuously fed and, according to ritualistic
ceremony, were given sufficient wealth and cows in charity. In this way,
they were engaged in chanting Vedic hymns. The King's daughter,
Rukmi!li, was exquisitely beautiful. She was very clean and had beautiful
teeth. The auspicious sacred girdle was tied on her wrist. She was given
various types of j ewelry to put on and long silken cloth to cover the upper
and lower parts of her body. Learned priests gave her protection by
chanting mantras from the Siima Veda, {{g Veda and Yajur Veda. After
this they chanted mantras from the Atharva Veda and offered oblations in
the fire to pacify the ominous conjunctions of different stars.
King Bhi maka was very experienced in dealing with the b riihmartas and
priests when such ceremonies were held. He specifically distinguished the
brahmmyas by giving them large quantities of gold and silver, grains mixed
with molasses, and cows decorated with golden ornaments. D amagho a,
Sisupala 's father, executed all kinds of ritualistic performances to invoke
good fortune for his own family. Sisupala's father was known as
Damagho a due to his superior ability to cut down unregulated citizens.
Dama means curbing down, and gho a means famous; so he was famous
for controlling the citizens. Damagho a thought that if Kr !la came to
disturb the marriage ceremony, he would certainly cut Him down with his
military power. Therefore, after performing the various auspicious cere
monies, D amagho a gathered his military divisions, known as Madasravi.
He took many elephants, garlanded with golden necklaces, and many
chariots and horses which were similarly decorated. It appeared that
Damagho a, along with his son and other companions, was going to
Ku!llJina, not completely forgetting the marriage, but mainly intent on
fighting.
Kr  a Kidnaps Rukmi i 357
When King Bhi maka learned that Damagho a and his party were
arriving, he left the city to receive them. Outside the city gate there were
many gardens where the guests were welcomed to stay. In the Vedic system
of marriage, the bride's father receives the large party of the bridegroom
and accomodates them in a suitable place for two or three days until the
marriage ceremony is performed. The party led by Damagho a contained
thousands of men, among whom the prominent kings and personalities
were Jarasandha, Dantavakra, Vidiiratha and Pau 9raka. It was an open
secret that Rukmini was meant to be married to Krsna but that her elder
brother, Rukmi, had arranged her marriage to Sis pala. There was also
some whispering going on about a rumor that Rukmi i had sent a messen
ger to Kr  a; therefore the soldiers suspected that Kr  a might cause a
disturbance by attempting to kidnap Rukmi i. Even though they were not
without fear, they were all prepared to give Kr  a a nice fight in order to
prevent the girl from being taken away. Sri Balarama received the news
that Kr  a had left for Ku!t9ina accompanied only by a b riihmal)a; He also
heard that Sisupala was there with a large number of soldiers. Suspecting
that they would attack Kr  a, Balarama took strong military divisions of
chariots, infantry, horses and elephants and arrived at the precinct of
Kundina. '
. .
Meanwhile, inside the palace, Rukmi i was expecting Kr  a to arrive,
but when neither He nor the briihmal)a who took her message appeared,
she became full of anxiety and began to think how unfortunate she was.
"There is only one night between today and my marriage day, and still
neither the b riihmal)a nor Syamasundara has returned. I cannot ascertain
any reason for this." Having little hope, she thought perhaps Kr  a had
found reason to become dissatisfied and had rejected her fair proposal. As
a result, the briihmar-a might have become disappointed and not come
back. Although she was thinking of various causes for the delay, she
expected them both at every moment.
Rukmi i further began to think that demigods such as Lord Brahma,
Lord Siva and the goddess Durga might have been displeased. It is generally
said that the demigods become angry when they are not properly
worshiped. For instance, when lndra found that the inhabitants of
Vrndavana were not worshiping him (Kr  a having stopped the Indra
yajiia), he became very angry and wanted to chastise them. Thus Rukmi i
was thinking that since she did not worship Lord Siva or Lord Brahma
very much, they might have become angry and tried to frustrate her plan.
Similarly she thought that the goddess Durga, the wife of Lord Siva,
might have taken the side of her husband. Lord Siva is known as Rudra,
358 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
and his wife is known as Rudra i. Rudra i and Rudra refer to those who
are very accustomed to putting others in a distressed condition so they
might cry forever. Rukmi i was thinking of the goddess Durgii as Girijii,
the daughter of the Himalayan Mountains. The Himalayan Mountains are
very cold and hard, and she thought of the goddess Durgii as hardhearted
and cold. In her anxiety to see Kr  1a, Rukmi i, who was after all still a
child, thought this way about the different demigods. The gopis worship
goddess Katyayani to get KH a as their husband; similarly Rukmi i was
thinking of the various types of demigods, not for material benefit, but in
respect to Kr  a. Praying to the demigods to achieve the favor of Krwa is
not irregular, and Rukmi i was fully absorbed in thoughts of Kr  a.
Even though she pacified herself by thinking that the time for Govinda
to arrive had not yet expired, Rukmi i felt that she was hoping against
hope. She began to shed tears, and when they became more forceful, she
closed her eyes in helplessness. While Rukmi i was in such deep thought,
auspicious symptoms appeared in different parts of her body. Trembling
began to occur in her left eyelid and in her arms and thighs. When
trembling occurs in these parts of the body, it is an auspicious sign
indicating that something lucrative can be expected.
Just then, Rukmi i, full of anxiety, saw the briihmm;w messenger.
Kr  a, being the Supersoul of all living beings, could understand Rukmi i's
anxiety; therefore he sent the briihmarza inside the palace to let her know
that He had arrived. When Rukmi i saw the briihmm;w, she could under
stand the auspicious trembling of her body and immediately became
elated. She smiled and inquired from him whether or not Kr !la had
already come. The briihmarza replied that the son of the Y adu dynasty,
Sri Kr  a, had arrived; he further encouraged her by saying that Kr  Ia
had promised to carry her away without fail. Rukmi i was so elated by the
briihmm;w's message that she wanted to give him in charity everything she
possessed. However, finding nothing suitable for presentation, she simply
offered him her respectful obeisances. The significance of offering resp'ect
ful obeisances to a superior is that the one offering obeisances is obliged
to the respected person. In other words, Rukmiiii implied that she would
remain ever grateful to the briihmm;w. Anyone who gets the favor of the
goddess of fortune, as did this briihmarza, is without a doubt always happy
in material opulence.
When King Bhi maka heard that KH a and Balariima had come, he
invited Them to see the marriage ceremony of his daughter. Immediately
he arranged to receive Them, along with Their soldiers, in a suitable
gardep house. As was the Vedic custom, the King offered Kr  a and
Kr t; a Kidnaps Rukmi i 359
Balarama honey and fresh washed cloth. He was hospitable not only to
Kr  a, Balarama and kings such as Jarasandha, but he also received many
other kings and princes according to their respective personal strength, age
and material possessions. Out of curiosity and eagerness, the people of
Ku!1 ina assembled before Krwa and Balarama and began to drink the
nectar of Their beauty. With tearful eyes, they offered Them their silent
respects. They were very pleased, considering Lord Kr  a the suitable
match for Rukmi!li They were so eager to unite Kr  a and Rukmi!li that
they began to pray to the Personality of Godhead : "My dear Lord, if we
have performed any pious activities that You are satisfied with, kindly be
merciful upon us and accept the hand of Rukmi i'." It appears that
Rukmi i was a very popular princess, and all the citizens, out of intense
love for her, prayed for her best fortune. In the meantime, Rukmi i, being
very nicely dressed and protected by bodyguards, came out of the palace
to visit the temple of Ambika, the goddess Durga.
Deity worship in the temple has been in existence since the beginning
of Vedic culture. There is a class of men described in the Bhagavad-gita as
the veda-viida-rata; they only believe in the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies,
but not in the temple worship. Such foolish people may here take note
that although this marriage of Kr !la and Rukmi i took place more than .
5 ,000 years ago, there were arrangements for temple worship. In the
Bhagavad-gita the Lord says, yiinti deva-vratii deviin: "The worshipers of
the demigods attain the abodes of the demigods . " There were many
people who worshiped the demigods and many who directly worshiped
the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The system of demigod worship was
directed mainly to Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Lord Ga!lesa, the sun-god and
the goddess Durga. Lord Siva and the goddess Durga were worshiped even
by the royal families; other minor demigods were worshiped by silly
inferior people. As far as the briihmar;ws and V ai  avas are concerned, they
simply worship Lord Vi  u, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. In the
Bhagavad-gita the worship of demigods is condemned, but not forbidden;
there it is clearly stated that the less intelligent class of men worship the
different kinds of demigods for material benefit. On the other hand, even
though Rukmi i' was the goddess of fortune, she went to the temple of the
g oddess Durga because the family deity was worshiped there. In the
S rimad-Bhiigavatam it is stated that as Rukmi i was proceeding towards
the temple of the goddess Durga, within her heart she was always thinking
of the lotus feet of Kr !la. Therefore when Rukmi!ll went to the temple
it was not with the intention of an ordinary person, who goes to beg for
material benefits; her only target was Kr !la. When people go to the temple
360 Kr J)a, the Supre me Perso nality of Godhead
of a demigod, the obj ective is actually Kf§l)a, since it is He who empowers
the demigods to provide material benefits.
As Rukmi 1i proceeded toward the temple, she was very silent and grave.
Her mother and her girl friend were by her side, and the wife of a b riihmarta
was in the center ; surrounding her were royal bodyguards. (This custom
of a would-be bride going to the temple of a demigod is still practiced in
India. ) As the procession continued , various musical sounds were heard.
D rums, conchshells, and bugles of different sizes such as par-avas, turyas
and bheris combined to make a sound which was not only auspicious but
very sweet to hear. There were thousands of wives of respectable
b riihmaras present . These women were all dressed very nicely with suitable
ornaments. They presented Rukmipi with flower garlands, sandalwood
pulp and a variety of colorful garments to assist her in w orshiping Lord
Siva and the goddess Durga. Some of these ladies were very old and knew
perfectly well how to chant prayers to the goddess Durga and Lord Siva ;
so , followed by Rukmi 1i and others, they led these prayers before the
deity.
Rukmi!ll offered her prayers to the deity by saying, "My dear goddess
Durga, I offer my respectful obeisances unto you as well as to your chil
dren . " The goddess Durga has four famous children : two daughters-the
goddess of fortune, Lak§mi, and the goddess of learning, Sarasvati-and
two famous sons, Lord Gape8a and Lord Karttikeya. They are all con
sidered to be demigods and goddesses. Since the goddess Durga is always
worshiped along with her famous children, Rukmipi specifically offered
her respectful obeisances to the deity in that way ; however her prayers
were different. Ordinary people pray to the goddess Durga for material
wealth, fame, profit, strength and so on ; Rukmi 1i, however, desired to
have Kr§pa for her husband and therefore prayed to the deity to be
pleased upon her and bless her. Since she desired only Kr§pa, her worship
of the demigods is not condemned. While Rukmipi was praying, a variety
of items were presented before the deity, chief of which were water,
different kinds of flames, incense, garments, garlands and various food
stuffs prepared with ghee, such as pu ris and lwcuris. There were also
fruits, sugar cane, betel nuts and spices offered. With great devotion,
Rukmi!ll offered them to the deity according to the regulative principles
directed by the old b riihma!W ladies. After this ritualistic ceremony, the
ladies offered the remnants of the foodstuffs to Rukmipi as prasiidam,
which she accepted with great respect. Then Rukmipi offered her obei
sances to the ladies and to the goddess Durga. After the business of deity
worship was finished , Rukmipi caught hold of the hand of one of her
girl friends and left the temple, accompanied by the others.
"Rukmi i was praying to Kr  a for the life of her brother. " (p. 365)

"Kalayavana burnt into ashes within a moment. " (p . 336)
"The cook found a nice baby within the belly of the fish. " (p. 372)
Kr JJa Kidnaps Rukmini 3 6 1
All the princes and visitors who came to Ku  ina for the marriage were
assembled outside the temple to see Rukmi i. The princes were especially
very eager to see her because they all actually thought that they would
have Rukmi i as their wife . Struck with wonder upon seeing Rukmi i,
they thought that she was specially manufactured by the Creator to
bewilder all the great chivalrous princes. H er body was well-constructed,
the middle portion being thin. She had green eyes, pink lips, and a beauti
ful face which was enhanced by her scattered hair and by different kinds
of earrings. Around her feet she wore j eweled lockets. The bodily luster
and beauty of Rukrni i appeared as if painted by an artist perfectly
presenting beauty following the description of great poets. The breast of
Rukmi i is described as heing a little bit high , indicating that she was just
a youth not more than thirteen or fourteen years old. H er beauty was spe
cifically intended to attract the attention of Krsna. Although the princes
gazed u pon her beautiful features , she was not at all proud. Her eyes moved
restlessly, and when she smiled very simply, like an innocent girl, her teeth
appeared j ust like lotus flowers. Expecting Kr  a to take her away at any
moment , she proceeded very slowly towards her home . Her legs moved
just like a full-grown swan , and her ankle bells tinkled very mildly.
As already explained, the great chivalrous princes who assembled there
were so overwhelmed by Rukmi i's beauty that they almost became
unconscious. Full of lust , they hopelessly desired Rukmini's hand , com
paring their own beauty with hers. Srimati Rukmini, however , was not
interested in any of them ; in her heart she was simply expecting Kr  a to
come and carry her away. As she was adjusting the ornaments on her left
hand finger, she happened to look upon the princes and suddenly saw that
Kr  a was present amongst them. Although Rukmi i had never before seen
Kr  a, she was always thinking of Him ; thus she had no difficulty in
recognizing Him amongst the princely order. Krsna, not being concerned
with the other princes, immediately took the opportunity of placing
Rukmi i on His chariot, marked by a flag bearing an image of Garuda. He
then proceeded slowly, without fear, taking away Rukmini exactly as the
lion takes the deer from the midst of the j ackals. Meanwhile Balarama
appeared on the scene with the soldiers of the Yadu dynasty.
J arasandha, who had many times experienced defeat by Kr  a, began
to roar : " H ow is this? Kr  a is taking Rukmi i away from us without
any opposition! What is the use in our being chivalrous fighters with
arrows? My dear princes , just look ! We are losing our reputation by
this action. It is just like the j ackal taking away the booty from the lion."
Th us ends the Bhak tivedan ta purport of the Fifty-second Chap ter of
Kr  a, "K!§!W Kidnaps R uk mini. "
53 I Krsna Defeats All the Princes• • •
and Takes Rukmini Home to Dvaraka•
All the princes led by Jarasandha became very angry at Kr pa's kid
napping Rukmi!li. Struck by the beauty of Rukmipi, they had fallen from
the backs of their horses and elephants, but now they began to stand up
and properly arm themselves. Picking up their bows and arrows, they
began to chase Kr pa on their chariots, horses and elephants. To check
their progress, the soldiers of the Y adu dynasty turned and faced them.
Thus terrible fighting between the two belligerant groups began. The
princes opposing Kr pa were led by J arasandha, and they were all very
expert in fighting. They began to shoot their arrows at the soldiers of
Y adu just as a cloud splashes the face of a mountain with torrents of rain.
Gathered on the face of a mountain, a cloud does not move very much,
and therefore the force of rain is much more severe on a mountain than it
is anywhere else.
The opposing princes were determined to defeat Kr pa and recapture
Rukmivi from His custody, and they fought with Him as severely as
possible. Rukmi!1i, seated by the side of Kr !la , saw arrows raining from
the opposing party onto the faces of the soldiers of Y adu . In a fearful
attitude , she began to look on the face of Kr !la, expressing her grateful
ness that He had taken such a great risk for her sake only. H er eyes moving,
she appeared to be very sorry, and Kr !la could immediately understand
her mind. He encouraged her with these words : "My dear Rukmi!li, don't
worry. Please rest assured that the soldiers of the Y adu dynasty will kill
all the opposing soldiers without delay."
As Kr !la was speaking with Rukmi!li, the commanders of the Y adu dy
nasty's soldiers, headed by L ord Balarama, who is also known as Sankar a!la,
as well as by Gadadhara, not tolerating the defiant attitude of the
opposing soldiers, began to strike their horses, elephants, and chariots with
arrows. As the fighting progressed , the princes and soldiers of the enemy
362
Kr  a Defeats All the Princes 363
camp began to fall from their horses, elephants and chariots. Within a very
short time, it was seen that millions of severed heads, decorated with
helmets and earrings, had fallen on the battlefield. The soldiers' hands
were cut up along with their bows and arrows and clubs; one head was
piled upon another, and one horse was piled upon another. All the
infantry soldiers, as well as their camels, elephants and asses, fell down
with severed heads.
When the enemy, headed by J arasandha, found that they were gradually
being defeated by the soldiers of Kr IJa, they thought it unwise to risk
losing in the battle for the sake of Sisupala. Sisupala himself should
have fought to rescue RukmiiJI from the hands of Kr  m, but when the
soldiers saw that Sisupala was not competent enough to fight with Kr91Ja,
they decided not to lose their strength unnecessarily; therefore they
ceased fighting and dispersed.
Some of the princes, as a matter of etiquette, appeared before Sisupala.
They saw that Sisupala was very much discouraged, like one who has lost
his wife. His face appeared to be dried up, he had lost all his energy, and
all the luster of his body had disappeared. They began to address Sisupala
thus: "My dear Sisupala, don't be discouraged in this way. You belong to
the royal order and are the chief amongst the fighters. There is no
question of distress or happiness for a person like you because neither of
these conditions is everlasting. Take courage. Don't be disappointed by
this temporary reverse. After all, we are not the final actor; as puppets
dance in the hands of a magician, we are all dancing by the will of the
Supreme, and according to His grace only we suffer distress or enjoy
happiness, which therefore balance equally in all circumstances."
The whole catastrophe of the defeat was due to the envious nature of
Rukmivi's elder brother, Rukmi. Having seen his sister forcibly taken
away by Kr !la after he had planned to marry her with Sisupala, Rukmi
was frustrated. So he and Sisupala, his friend and intended brother-in-law,
returned to their respective homes. Rukmi, very much agitated, was
determined to personally teach Kr9 1a a lesson. He called for his own
soldiers-a military phalanx consisting of several thousand elephants;
horses, chariots and infantry-and, equipped with this military strength,
he began to follow Kr IJa to Dvaraka. In order to show his prestige,
Rukmi began to promise before all the returning kings, " You could not
help Sisupala marry my sister Rukmivi, but I cannot allow Rukmipi to be
taken away by Kr IJa. I shall teach Him a lesson. Now I am going there."
He presented himself as a big commander and vowed before all the princes
present, "Unless I kill Kr va in the fight and bring back my sister from
364 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
His clutches, I shall no more return to my capital city, Ku 9Jna. I make
this vow before you all, and you will see that I shall fulfill it." After thus
vibrating all these boasting words, Rukmi immediately got on his chariot
and told his chariot driver to pursue Kr  a. He said, "I want to fight with
Him immediately. This cowherd boy has become very proud because of
His tricky way of fighting with the k atriyas, but today I shall teach Him a
good lesson. Because He has the impudency to kidnap my sister, I, with
my sharpened arrows, shall teach Him very good lessons indeed." Thus this
unintelligent man, Rukmi, ignorant of the extent of the strength and ac
tivities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, began to voice impudent
threats.
In great stupidity he soon stood before Kr  a, telling Him repeatedly,
"Stop for a minute and fight with me! " After saying this he drew his
bow and directly shot three forceful arrows against Kr  a's body. Then he
condemned Kr  a as the most abominable descendant of the Y adu dynasty
and asked Him to stand before him for a minute so that he could teach
Him a good lesson. "You are carrying away my sister just like a crow
stealing clarified butter meant for use in a sacrifice. You are simply proud
of Your military strength, but You cannot fight according to regulative
principles. You have stolen my sister; now I shall relieve You of Your
false prestige. You can keep my sister under Your possession only as long
as I do not pinion You to the ground for good with my arrows."
Lord Kr  a, after hearing all these cra7'.y words from Rukmi, im
mediately shot an arrow and severed the string of Rukmi's bow, making
him unable to use another arrow. Rukmi immediately took another bow
and shot another five arrows at Krwa. Being attacked for the second time
by Rukmi, Krwa again severed his bowstring. Rukmi took a third bow,
and Kr  a again cut off its string. This time, in order to teach Rukmi c
lesson, Kr  a personally shot six arrows at him, and then He shot another
eight arrows. Thus four horses were killed by four arrows, the chariot
driver was killed by another arrow, and the upper portion of Rukmi's
chariot, including the flag, . was chopped off with the remaining three
arrows.
Having run out of arrows, Rukmi took the assistance of swords, shields,
tridents, lances and similar other weapons used for fighting hand-to-hand,
but Kr  a immediately severed them all in the same way. Being repeatedly
baffled in his attempts, Rukmi simply took his sword and ran very swiftly
toward Kr  a, just as a fly proceeds toward a fire. As soon as Rukmi
reached Krwa, Kr  a cut his weapon to pieces. This time Kr  a took out
His sharp sword and was about to kill him immediately, but Rukmi's
Kr  a Defeats All the Princes 365
sister Rukmil)i, understanding that this time Kf l)a would not excuse her
brother , fell down at the lotus feet of Kr !la and in a very grievous tone,
trembling with great fear , began to plead with her husband.
Rukmil)i first addressed Kf l)a as " Yoge8vara. " Y oge8vara means one
who is possessed of inconceivable opulence and energy. Kf l)a possesses
inconceivable opulence and energy, whereas Rukmi i's brother had only
limited military potency. Kr !la is immeasurable , whereas her brother was
measured in every step of his life. Therefore , Rukmi was not even com
parable to an insignificant insect before the unlimited power of Kf J)a. She
also addressed Kr !la as the God of the gods. There are many powerful
demigods, such as Lord Brahma, Lord Siva, Indra, and Candra ; Kf l)a is
the Lord of all these gods, whereas Rukmil)i's brother was not only an
ordinary human being, but was , in fact , the lowest of all because he had
no understanding of Kr  a. In other words, a human being who has no
conception of the actual position of Kr !la is the lowest in human society.
Rukmil)i also addressed Kr !la as "J agatpati," the master of the whole
cosmic manifestation. In comparison, her brother was only a ordinary
prmce.
In this way, Rukmil)i compared the position of Rukmi to that of
Kr !la and very feelingly pleaded with her husband not to kill her brother
just before the auspicious time of her being united with Kr :l)a, but to
excuse him. In other words, she displayed her real position as a woman.
She was happy to get Kr !la as her husband just at the moment when her
marriage to another was to be performed , but she did not want it to be at
the loss of her elder brother, who , after all, loved his young sister and
wanted to hand her over to one who was, according to his own calcula
tions, a better man. While Rukmil)i was praying to Kf l)a for the life of her
brother , her whole b ody trembled , and because of her anxiety, her face
appeared to be dried up, her throat became choked , and , due to her
trembling, the ornaments on her b ody loosened and fell scattered on the
ground. Lord Kr !la immediately became compassionate and agreed not to
kill the foolish Rukmi. But, at the same time , He wanted to give him
some light punishment , so He tied him up with a piece of cloth and
snipped at his moustache , beard and hair , keeping some spots here and
there.
While Kr !la was dealing with Rukmi in this way, the soldiers of the
Yadu dynasty, commanded by Balarama Himself, broke the whole strength
of Rukmi's army just as an elephant in a tank discards the feeble stem of a
lotus flower . In other words, as an elephant breaks the whole construction
of a lotus flower while bathing in the reservoir of water , so the military
366 Kf  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
strength of the Yadus broke up Rukmi's forces. Yet when the com
manders of the Y adu dynasty came back to see Kr !la, they were all
surprised to see the condition of Rukmi. Lord Balarama became especially
compassionate for His sister-in-law, who was newly married to His brother.
In order to please Rukmi!li, Balarama personally untied Rukmi, and in
order to further please her, Balarama, as the elder brother of Kr !la, spoke
some words of chastisement. "Kr !la, Your action is not at all satisfactory,"
He said. "This is an abomination very much contrary to our family tra
dition! To cut someone's hair and shave his moustache and beard is almost
comparable to killing him. Whatever Rukmi might have been, he is now
our brother-in-law, a relative of our family, and _You should not have put
him in such a condition."
After this, in order to pacify her, Lord Balarama said to Rukmi!li, "You
should not be sorry because your brother has been made very odd-looking.
Everyone suffers or enjoys the results of his own actions." Lord Balarama
wanted to impress upon Rukmivi that she should not have been sorry for
the consequences suffered by her brother due to his actions. There was no
need of being too affectionate toward such a brother. Lord Balarama again
turned toward Kr va and said, "My dear Kr !la, a relative, even though he
commits such a blunder and deserves to be killed, should be excused. For
when such a relative is conscious of his own fault, that consciousness itself
is like 'death. Therefore, there is no need in killing him." He again turned
toward Rukmi!li and informed her that the current duty of the k§atriya in
the human society is so fixed that, according to the principles of fighting,
one's own brother may become an enemy on the opposite side. A k§atriya
does not hesitate to kill his own brother. In other words, Lord Balarama
wanted to instruct Rukmi!li that Rukmi and Kr rta were right in_ not show
ing mercy to each other in the fighting, despite the family consideration
that they happened to be brothers-in-law. Sri Balarama continued to inform
Rukmi!li that k§atriyas are typical emblems of the materialistic way of life;
they become puffed-up whenever there is a question of material acquisition.
Therefore, when there is a fight between two belligerent k§atriyas on
account of kingdom, land, wealth, women, prestige or power, they try to
put one another into the most abominable condition. Balarama instructed
Rukmi!li that her affection toward her brother Rukmi, who had created
enmity with so many persons, was a perverse consideration befitting an
ordinary materialistic person. Her brother's character was not at all ador
able, considering his treatment toward other friends, and yet Rukmi!li, as
an ordinary woman, was so affectionate toward him. He was not fit to be
her brother, and still Rukmini was lenient toward him.
Kr pa Defeats All the Princes 367
"Besides that," Balarama continued, "the consideration that a person is
neutral or is one's friend or enemy is generally made by persons who are in
the bodily concept of life. Such foolish persons become bewildered by the
illusory energy of the Supreme Lord. The spirit soul is of the same pure
quality in any embodiment of matter, but those who are not sufficiently
intelligent see only the bodily differentiations of animals and men, literates
and illiterates, rich and poor, and so on, which cover the pure spirit soul.
Such differentiation, observed purely on the basis of the body, is exactly
like differentiation between fires in terms of the different types of fuel
they consume. Whatever the size and shape of the fuel, there is no such
variety of size and shape of the fire which comes out. Similarly, in the sky
there are no differences in size or shape."
In this way Balarama appeased them by His moral and ethical instruction.
He stated further: "This body is part of the material manifestation. The
living entity or spirit soul, being in contact with matter, is transmigrating,
due to illusory enjoyment, from one body to another, and that is known as
material existence. This contact of the living entity with the material
manifestation has neither integration nor disintegration. My dear chaste
sister-in-law, the spirit soul is, of course, the cause of this material body, as
much as the sun is the cause of sunlight, eyesight and the forms of material
manifestation. The example of the sunshine and the material manifestation
is very appropriate in the matter of understanding the living entities' con
tact with this material world. In the morning, there is sunrise, and the heat
and light expand gradually throughout the whole day. The sun is the cause
of all material production and shapes and forms ; it is due to the sun that
integration and disintegration of material elements take place. But as soon
as the sun is set, the whole manifestation is no longer connected to the sun,
which has passed from one place to another. When the sun passes from the
eastern to the western hemisphere, the result of interaction due to the
sunshine in the eastern hemisphere remains, but the sunshine itself is
visible again on the western hemisphere. Similarly, the living entity
accepts or produces different bodies and different bodily relationships in a
particular circumstance, but as soon as he gives up the present body and
accepts another, he has nothing to do with the former body. Similarly, the
living entity has nothing to do with the next body which he accepts. He is
always free from the contact of this bodily contamination. Therefore, the
conclusion is that the appearance and disappearance of the body have no
thing to do with the living entity, as much as the waxing and waning ofthe
moon have nothing to do with the moon. When there is waxing of the
moon, we falsely think that the moon is developing, and when there is
368 KH!la, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
waning of the moon we think that the moon is decreasing. Factually the
moon, as it is, is always the same; it has nothing to do with such visible
waxing and waning activities.
"Consciousness of material existence can be compared to sleeping and
dreaming. When a man sleeps, he dreams of many nonfactual happenings,
and as a result of dreaming he becomes subjected to different kinds of
distress and happiness. Similarly, when a person is in the dreaming
condition of material consciousness, he suffers the effects of accepting a
body and giving it up again in material existence. Opposite to this material
consciousness is KH a consciousness. In other words, when a man is
elevated to the platform of Kr  a consciousness he becomes free from
this false conception of life."
In this way, Sri Balarama instructed them in spiritual knowledge. He
addressed his sister-in-law thus: "Sweet, smiling Rukmipi, do not be
aggrieved by false motives caused by ignorance. Due to false notions only
one becomes unhappy, but this unhappiness is immediately removed by
discussing the philosophy of actual life. Be happy on that platform only."
After hearing such enlightening instruction from Sri Balarama, Rukmipi
immediately became pacified and happy and adjusted her mental condition,
which was very much afflicted by seeing the degraded position of her
brother, Rukmi. As far as Rukmi was concerned, neither was his promise
fulfilled nor his mission successful. He had come from home with his
soldiers and military phalanx to defeat Kr pa and release his sister, but on
the contrary, he lost all his soldiers and military strength. He was personally
much degraded, and in that condition he was very sorry; but by the grace
of the Lord he could continue his life to the fixed destination. Because he
was a k§atriya, he could remember his promise that he would not return
to his capital city, Kupl).ina, without killing Kr pa and releasing his sister,
which he had failed to do; therefore, he decided in anger not to return
to his capital city, and he constructed a small cottage in the village known
as Bhojakata and began to reside there for the rest of his life.
After defeating all the opposing elements and forcibly carrying away
Rukmipi, Kr pa brought her to His capital city, Dvaraka, and then
married her according to the Vedic ritualistic principle. After this marriage,
Kr pa became the King of the Y adus at Dvaraka. On the occasion of His
marriage with Rukmipi, all the inhabitants were happy, and in every house
there were great ceremonies. The inhabitants of Dvaraka City became so
pleased that they dressed themselves with the nicest possible ornaments
and garments, and they went to present gifts according to their means to
the newly married couple, Kr pa and Rukmipi. All the houses of Y adupuri
Krsna Defeats All the Princes 3690 0 0
(Dvaraka) were decorated with flags, festoons and flowers. Each and every
house had an extra gate specifically prepared for this occasion, and on
both sides of the gate there were big water jugs filled with water. The
whole city was flavored by the burning of high quality mcense, and at
night there was illumination by thousands of lamps, decorating each and
every building.
The entire city appeared jubilant on the occasion of Lord KH a's
marriage with Rukmi.l).i. Everywhere in the city there was profuse decora
tion of banana trees and betel nut trees. These two trees are considered
very auspicious in happy ceremonies. At the same time there was an
assembly of many elephants, who carried the respective kings of different
friendly kingdoms. It is the habit of the elephant that whenever he sees
some small plants and trees, out of his sportive frivolous nature, he
uproots the trees and throws them hither and thither. The elephants
assembled on this occasion also scattered the banana and betel nut trees,
but in spite of such intoxicated action, the whole city, with the trees
thrown here and there, looked very nic&.
The friendly kings of the Kurus and the Pa\19avas were represented by
Dhftara tra, the five Pa 9u brothers, King Drupada, King Santardana, as
well as Rukmi i's father, Bhi maka. Because of Kf  a's kidnapping
Rukmi i, there was initially some misunderstanding between the two
families, but Bhi maka, King of Vidarbha, b eing approached by Sri Bala
rama and persuaded by many saintly persons, was induced to participate in
the marriage ceremony of Kr lJa and Rukmi i. Although the incidence of
Kf  a's kidnapping was not a very happy occurrence in the kingdom of
Vidarbha, kidnapping was not an unusual affair among the k atriyas. Kid
napping was, in fact, current in almost all marriages. Anyway, King
Bhi maka was from the very beginning inclined to hand over his beautiful
daughter to .Kf lJa. In one way or another his purpose had been served, and
so he was pleased to join the marriage ceremony, even though his eldest son
was degraded in the fight. It is mentioned in the Padma Purt1[la that Maha
raja N anda and the cowherd boys of Vrndavana joined the marriage cere
mony. Kings from the kingdoms of Kuru, Srn.jaya, Kekaya, Vidarbha and
Kunti came to Dvaraka on this occasion with all their royal paraphernalia.
The story of Rukmi Jl'S being kidnapped by Kf l}a was poeticized, and
the professional readers recited it everywhere. All the assembled kings and,
especially, their daughters were struck with wonder and became very
pleased upon hearing the chivalrous activities of Kr  a. In this way, all
visitors as well as the inhabitants of Dvaraka City became joyful seeing
Kf  a and Rukmi i together. In other words, the Supreme Lord, the main-
370 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
tainer of everyone, and the goddess of fortune were united, and all the
people felt extremely jubilant.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Fifty-third Chapter of
Kr  a, "Kr r-a Defeats all the Princes and Takes R ukmi!li Home to
Dviirakii. "·
54 I Pradyumna Born
to Krsna and Rukmini• • • •
It is said that Cupid, who is directly part and parcel of Lord Vasudeva
and who was formerly burnt to ashes by the anger of Lord Siva, took
birth in the womb of Rukmil)i begotten by Kr !la . This is Kamadeva,
a demigod of the heavenly planets especially capable of inducing lusty
desires. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kr !la, has many grades of
parts and parcels, but the quadruple expa!lsions of Kr l)a- Vasudeva,
Sankar al)a, Pradyumna and Aniruddha-are directly in the Vi pu category.
Kama, or the Cupid demigod, who later on took his birth in the womb of
Rukmil)i, was also named Pradyumna, but he cannot be the Pradyumna of
the Vi I)U category. He belongs to the category of jiva-tattva, but for
special power in the category of demigods, he was a part and parcel of the
super prowess of Pradyumna. That is the verdict of the Gosvamis.
Therefore, when Cupid was bu nt into ashes by the anger of Lord Siva
he merged into the body of Vasudeva, and in order to get his body again,
he was begotten by Lord Kr l)a Himself; he was directly released from his
body in the womb of Rukmil)i and was born as the son of Krwa,
celebrated by the name Pradyumna. Because he was begotten by Lord
Kr l)a directly, his qualities were most similar to those of Kr !la.
There was a demon of the name Sambara who was destined to be killed
by this Pradyumna. The Sambara demon knew of his destiny, and as soon
as he learned that Pradyumna was born, he took the shape of a woman
and kidnapped the baby from the maternity home less than ten days after
his birth. The demon took him and threw him directly into the sea. But,
as it is said, "Whoever is protected by Kr pa, no one can kill ; and whoever
is destined to be killed by Kr !la, no one can protect. " When Pradyumna
was thrown in the sea, a big fish immediately swallowed him . Later on
this fish was caught by the net of a fisherman, and the fish was later on
sold to the Sambara demon. In the kitchen of the demon there was a
3 7 1
372 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
maidservant whose name was Mayavati. This woman had formerly been
the wife of Cupid , and had been called Rati. When the fish was presented
to the demon Sambara, it was taken charge of by his cook , who was to
make it into a palatable fish preparation. D emons and the riik§asas are
accustomed to eat meat , fish and similar non-vegetarian foods. Similarly ,
other demons, like Rava a, Karhsa and Hira yakasipu , although born of
b riihmar-a and k§atriya fathers, used to take meat and flesh without
discrimination. This practice is still prevalent in India, and those who are
meat and fish eaters are generally called demons and riik§asas.
When the cook was cutting the fish, he found a nice baby within the
belly of the fish, and he immediately presented him to the charge of
Mayavati, who was an assistant in the kitchen affairs. This woman was
surprised to see how such a nice baby could remain within the belly of a
fish, and the situation perplexed her. The great sage Narada then appeared
and explained to her about the birth of Pradyumna, how the baby had
been taken away by Sambara and later on thrown into the sea, and so on.
In this way the whole story was disclosed to Mayavati, who had formerly
been Rati , the wife of Cupid. Mayavati knew that she had previously been
the wife of Cupid ; after her husband was burnt into ashes by the wrath of
Lord Siva, she was always expecting him to come back again in the material
form . This woman was engaged for cooking rice and dahl in the kitchen,
but when she got this nice baby and understood that he was Cupid , her
own husband , she naturally took charge of him and with great affection
began to bathe him . Miraculously, the baby very swiftly grew up, and
within a very short period he became a very beautiful young man. His eyes
were just like the petals of lotus flowers, his arms were very long, down to
the knees , and any woman who happened to see him became captivated by
his bodily beauty.
Mayavati could understand that her former husband , Cupid , born as
Pradyumna, had grown into such a nice young man, and she also gradually
became captivated and lusty. She was smiling before him with a feminine
attractiveness, expressing her desire for sexual unity. He therefore inquired
from her, " How is it possible that first of all you were affectionate like a
mother, and now you are expressing the symptoms of a lusty woman?
What is the reason for such a change? " On hearing this statement from
Pradyumna, the woman, Rati, replied , " My dear sir, you are the son of
Lord Kr p.a . Before you were ten days old , you were stolen by the
Sambara demon and later on thrown into the water and swallowed up by a
fish. In this way you have come under my care, but actually, in your
former life as Cupid , I. was your wife ; therefore, my manifestation of
Pradyumna Born to Kr  a and Rukmi i 373
conjugal symptoms is not at all incompatible. Sambara wanted to kill
you, and he is endowed with various kinds of mystic powers. Therefore,
before he again attempts' to kill you, please kill him as soon as possible
with your divine power. Since you were stolen by Sambara, your mother,
Rukmi idevi', has been in a very grievous condition, like a cuckoo bird who
has lost her babies. She is very affectionate toward you, and since you have
been taken away from her, she has been living like a cow aggrieved over
the loss of its calf."
Mayavati had mystic knowledge of supernatural power. Supernatural
powers are generally known as miiyii, and to supersede all such super
natural power there is another supernatural power, which is called mahii
miiyii. Mayavati had the knowledge of the mystic power of mahiimiiyii,
and she delivered to Pradyumna this specific energetic power in order to
defeat the mystic powers of the Sambara demon. Thus being empowered
by his wife, Pradyumna immediately went before Sambara and challenged
him to fight. Pradyumna began to address him in very strong language, so
that his temper might be agitated and he would be moved to fight. At
Pradyumna's words, the demon Sambara, being insulted, felt just like a
snake feels after being struck by one's leg. A serpent cannot tolerate being
kicked by another animal or by a man, and he immediately bites the
opponent.  
Sambara felt the words of Pradyumna as if they were a kick. He imme
diately took his club in his hand and appeared before Pradyumna to fight.
In great anger, he began to beat Pradyumna with his club, just as a thun
derbolt beats a mountain. The demon was also groaning and making a
noise like a thundering cloud. Pradyumna protected himself with his own
club, and eventually he struck the demon very severely. In this way, the
fighting between Sambarasura and Pradyumna began very seriously.
But Sambarasura knew the art of mystic powers and could raise himself
in the sky and fight from outer space. There is another demon of the
name Maya, and Sambarasura learned many mystic powers from him. He
thus raised himself high in the sky and began to throw various types of
nuclear weapons at the body of Pradyumna. In order to combat the
mystic powers or Sambarasura, Pradyumna remembered another mystic
power, known as mahiividyii, which was different from the black mystic
power. The mahiividyii mystic power is based on the quality of goodness.
Understanding that his enemy was formidable, Sambara took assistance
from various kinds of demonic mystic powers belonging to the Guhyak as,
the Gandharvas, the Pi.Siicas, the snakes and the Riik asas. But although the
demon exhibited his mystic powers and took shelter of supernatural
374 Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
strength, Pradyumna was able to counteract his strength and powers by the
superior power of mahiividyii. When Sambadisura was defeated in every
respect, Pradyumna then took his sharpened sword and immediate!y cut off
the demon's head, which was decorated with a helmet and with valuable
jewels. When Pradyumna thus killed the demon, all the demigods in the
higher planetary systems began to shower flowers on him.
Pradyumna's wife, Mayavati, could travel in outer space, and therefore
they directly reached his father's capital, Dvaraka, by the airways. They
passed above the palace of Lord KH a and began to come down as a cloud
comes down with lightning. The inner section of a palace is known as
anta pura (private apartments). Pradyumna and Mayavati could see that
there were many women there, and they sat down among them. When the
women saw Pradyumna, dressed in bluish garments, with very long arms,
curling hair, beautiful eyes, a smiling reddish face, jewelry and ornaments,
they first of all could not recognize him as Pradyumna, a personality
different from Kr  a. They all felt themselves to be very much blessed by
the sudden presence of Kr  a, and they wanted to hide in a different
corner of the palace.
When the women saw, however, that all the characteristics of Kr  a were
not present in the personality of Pradyumna, out of curiosity they came
back again to see him and his wife, Mayavati. All of them were conjecturing
as to who he was, for he was so beautiful. Among the women was
Rukmi idevi, who was equally beautiful, with her lotus-like eyes. Seeing
Pradyumna, she naturally remembered her own son, and milk began to
flow from her breast out of motherly affection. She then began to wonder,
"Who is this beautiful young boy? He appears to b e the most beautiful
person. Who is the fortunate young woman able to give birth to this nice
boy in her womb and become his mother? And who is that young woman
who has accompanied him? How have they met? Remembering my own
son, who was stolen even from the maternity home, I can only guess that
if he is living somewhere, he might have grown by this time to be like this
boy." Simply by intuition, Rukmi 1i could understand that Pradyumna
was her own lost son. She could also observe that Pradyumna resembled
Lord Kr  il in every respect. She was struck with wonder as to how he
acquired all the symptoms of Kr  a. She therefore began to think more
confidently that the boy must be her own grown-up son because she felt
much affection for him, and, as an auspicious sign, her left arm was
trembling.
At that very moment, Lord Kr  a, along with His father and mother,
Devaki and Vasudeva, appeared on the scene. Kr  a, the Supreme Person-
Pradyumna Born to Kr !J.a and Rukmi!J.i 375
ality of Godhead, could understand everything, yet in that situation He
remained silent. However, by the desire of Lord Sri Kn a, the great sage
Narada also appeared on the scene, and he began to disclose all the inci
dences-how Pradyumna had been stolen from the maternity home and
how he had grown up and had come there with his wife Mayavati, who
formerly had been Rati, the wife of Cupid. When everyone was informed
of the mysterious disappearance of Pradyumna and how he had grown up,
they all became struck with wonder because they had gotten back their
dead son after they were almost hopeless of his return. When they under
stood that it was Pradyumna who was present, they began to receive him
with great delight. One after another, all of the members of the family
Devaki, Vasudeva, Lord Sri Kr  a, Lord Balarama, and Rukmi i and all
the women of the family-began to embrace both Pradyumna and his wife
Mayavati. When the news of Pradyumna 's return was spread all over the
city of Dvaraka, all the astonished citizens began to come with great
anxiety to see the lost Pradyumna. They began to say, "The dead son has
come back. What can be more pleasing than this?"
Srila Sukadeva Gosvami has explained that, in the beginning, all the
residents of the palace, who were all mothers and stepmothers of
Pradyumna, mistook him to be Kr  a and were all bashful, infected by the
desire for conjugal love. The explanation is that Pradyumna's personal
appearance is exactly like Kf§ a's, and he was factually Cupid himself.
There was no cause of astonishment, therefore, when the mothers of
Pradyumna and other women mistook him in that way. It is clear from the
statement that Pradyumna 's bodily characteristics were so similar to
Kr  a's that he was mistaken to be Kr  a even by his mother.
Thus ends the Bhaktivedanta purport of the Fifty-fourth Chapter of
Kr IJ-a, 'Pradyumna Born to Knrw and Rukmirti. "
Thus ends Volume One of Kr  a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Glossary
Aghiis ura- dem on who appeared in V rndavana in the shape of a serpent
Ajita- the unconquerable one, a name of Kr !la
Briih mar-as-the spiritual order of society whose occupation is the cultiva-
tion of Vedic knowledge
Dhenukiisura- demon in the shape of an ass who was killed by Kr !la
Garu!Ia- the giant bird carrier of v !\U
]amnii§ tami- birthday anniversary of Lord Kr !la
]ariisandha- demon who attacked Mathura eighteen times and was finally
killed by Bl)hna
Kadamba- tree bearing a round yellow flower, seen generally only in the
v rndavana area
Kiilayavana- demonic enemy of Kr !la who attacked Mathura and was
killed by Mucukunda
Kaumiira- childhood age of Kr !la
Kaus tubha- transcendental jewel worn around the neck of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead
Kr§r-a- k a thii- narrations spoken by or about Kr !la
Mahiibhiigava ta- highly advanced devotee
Mahiimiiyii- external energy of the Supreme Lord, which covers the con
ditioned soul and does not allow him to understand the Supreme
Personality of Godhead
Muk unda- Lord Kr !la, who awards liberation and whose smiling face is
like a k unda flower
Nirgur-a- literally , without qualiti es (used to describe the Supreme Lord,
whose qualities cannot be estimated)
Nagapatn is-wives of the Kaliya serpent
Prakrta sahajiyii- p?eudo-devotees of Kr !la who fail to understand His
absolute , transcendental position.
377
378 Glossary
Prii[tiiyiima-yogic breathing exercise
Pasughna-one who kills animals or is killing himself
Ranchor-literally, "one who has left the battlefield"-(describes Kr  a in
His pastimes with Jarasandha when He left the battle with the motive
of renunciation)
Rasa-transcendental mellow relationship between the individual soul and
the Supreme Lord
Samiidhi-trance, absorption in meditation upon the Supreme Personality
of Godhead
Sankarsana-Balarama, the brother of Krsna
Siiradu;-piirrimii-full-moon night of th .  arat season, during which Kr  a
enjoyed the rasa dance with the gopis
Vaisya-the agricultural community in Vedic culture, who protect cows
and cultivate crops
Vi.§ru-all-pervasive, fully empowered expansion of Lord Kr  a, qualified
by full truth, full knowledge and full bliss.
Yadu dynasty-the family in which Kr  a appears; descending from Soma,
the god of the moon planet
Yogamiiya-the principal, internal potency of the Supreme Lord
Yogesvara-a name of Kr  a, the master of all mystic powers -
Index
Aghasura, 8 1 -84
Akriira
summoned by Kamsa, 238-
239
arrives in v rndavana, 244-250
takes Krw.a to M athura &
visits Viw.uloka, 25 1 -256
prayers of, 257-260
receives Kr !la at home , 3 1 6-
320
visits Hastinapura, 3 2 1 -326
Ari tasura, 236-237
Autu mn, description of, 1 36 - 1 46
Bakasura, 77-78
Balarama
transferred from womb of
Devaki, 9 - 1 1
naming of, 58
kills Pralambasura, 1 32- 1 33
kills D henukasura, 226
as Se a N aga, 2 5 5  
kills wrestlers , 277
kills brothers of Kamsa, 279
instruction to Kr !la & Ruk
mi!D, 366-368
Bhagavad-gitii, xii-xiv, 14, 18, 20,
48 , 50, 8 1 , 9 1 , 136, 149 ,
173, 185, 187, 194-195, 2 1 1 ,
2 1 5 , 247, 258, . 276, 278,
29 2, 294, 303 , 306, 3 1 5 ,
359
Bhak ti-yoga
as process to reach spiritual
sky , 1 8 6 , 1 87
required to understand Kr !la,
306-307
Brahma, Lord
approaches Vi !lu in Sveta
dvipa, 1
steals Kr !la's cows & be
wildered by Kr !la, 88-9 1
prayers to Kr !la, 96- 1 1 2
Brah majyoti
as emanation from Kr !la, 26,
1 0 3
full o f living entities , 1 36
Briih maT}aS
persecuted by Kamsa, 35-36
wives of, delivered, 1 5 7- 1 65
V ai !lavas as first-class , 346
Brah ma-sarhhitii, 1 6 , 1 9 , 8 1 , 9 6 ,
1 5 5 , 1 9 2 , 195 , 2 1 1 , · 2 1 6 ,
245 , 249
Caitanya, Lord Sri
munificence of, 209
praise of gopis by, 2 1 3
feelings o f separation of, 2 3 1
Caitanya-caritamrta, xviii, 1 1 , 30,
93, 1 66, 2 1 5 , 247, 3 14, 325,
334
C iira & Mu tika, 273-277
379
380 Kr J!a, the Supreme Personality of Godhead
Cow
the wealth of v rndavana, 39
prayers to Kr  a of, 182-183
Demigods
prayers for Kr  a in womb
by, 16-22
worship of, 152-153, 228-
229 , 257, 258, 359-360
(see also Brahmii, Indra,
Varur-a)
Devaki
prays to Kr !J.a, 28, 29
consoled by Kr !J.a, 281-282
Dhenukasura, l l5 - l l 7
D hrtara !ra, 321-326
Dvaraka, 333-334
Gargamuni (Gargacarya)
calculates life of Kr l).a, 56-59
statements of, related to cow
herd men, 178-179
initiates Kr l).a & Balarama,
284
becomes angry at Yadus, 332
Garu a, 128-129
Gopis
affairs with Kr§!la appealing
to all, xxi
elderly, at Kr l).a's birth cere
mony, 39
elderly, lodge complaints
against Kr  a, 60-61
attracted by flute, 147-151
Krwa steals garments of, 152-
156
attracted to rasa dance, 188-
202
identity of, 192, 2 l l , 216,
219-220
Kmm hides from, 203-207
songs by, 208-2 1 3
feelings of separation of, 231-
235
try to stop Kr l).a's departure,
252-255
as topmost yogis, 276, 306-
308
& Uddhava, 296-3 1 3
Gosvamls, Six
feelings of separation of, 2 3 1 ,
307
humanitarian activities of,
265
Govardhana Hill
worship of, 162-172
lifted by Kr l).a, 175-176
Haridasa Thakur, 345
Indra
worship of, stopped by Kf§l)a,
166-170
sends rain to Vrndavana, 173-
176
prayers by, 180-183
Jarasandha, 327-332, 347-348
Kalayavana, 332, 334-336
Kaliya, 1 19-127
Kamsa
hears omen, 3
spares Devaki, 1 3
informed o f Krwa's where
abouts, 237-238
sends Akrura for Kf§l)a, 238-
239
Kr pa's estimation of, 249-
250, 251
sees signs of death, 269
killing of, 277-280
Kesi Demon, 240
Kr§!la
identity & opulences of, xi
xm
birth of, 23-28
incarnations of, 28, 259
Index 38 1
appears by spiritual potency,
1 94-195
education of, 285-288
K[§!ta-kathii, xxi
Kubj a (hunchback wo man ) , 266-
267 , 3 14-3 1 6
Kuntl, 3 2 1 -323
Kuvalayapl a, 2 3 8 , 2 39 , 271 -272
L ilii-s mararam, 29 1
Love
Kr !la as obj ect of, xiii-xv,
235
distinguished from lust, 1 89
Mathura, 26 1 -265
Mayavatl ( Rati ) , 372-375
Mucukunda, 3 37-346
Nagapatnis , prayers of, 1 23 - 1 26
Nalakiivara & Ma!J.igrlva, 67-72
Nanda
meeting with Vasudeva, 40-42
arrested by V aru!J.a, 1 84 - 1 85
& Vidyadhara, 225-229
· & Uddhava, 293-29 6 , 3 1 2
Narada
informs Kamsa of K !J.a's
birth, 8
curses Nalakuvara & 1\lani
griva, 67-68
informs Kamsa of  !\a's
identity , 237-238
offers obeisances to ·  !Ia,
24 1 -242
discloses identity of Prad
yumna, 375
Narottamadis Thakur, 1 4 1 , 248
Paiicajana Demon, 288-289
p-  avas, 322-236
Pamk iya-rosa ( paramour love), 190
Parik it Maharaja
questions Sukadeva, xxiii-
xxw
Poverty , as aid to spiritual life ,
69 , 182
Pradyumna (son of Kr !la) , 3 7 1 -
375
Prak rta Sahajiyii (pseudo-devo
tees) , 198 , 3 1 6 , 349
Pralambasura , 1 3 1 - 1 3 3
Prayers
of demigods to Krwa m
wo mh , 1 3-22
of V asudeva, 25-28
of D evakl, 28-29
of Nalakuvara & Ma!J.igrlva ,
7 1 -72
of Brahma, 96-1 1 0
o f N agapatnls , 1 2 3 - 1 26
of Kaliya, 1 26- 1 27
of lndra, 180- 1 8 3
of Akrura , 257-260 , 3 1 7- 3 1 9
of Kuntl, 322-323
of Mucukunda, 34 1 -344
Plitana, xiii, 4 3 -49
Radhara!ll
Rasas
association of with Kr !J.a,
206-207
chief of gopis, 2 1 0-2 1 1
& bumblebee , 298-302
expansion of; 349
defined, xiv
Kr !la as reservoir of, 272
Riisa Dance
introduction to, 1 88-202
described & explained, 2 14-
224
imitation of, 2 1 9-220
Rukmi, 3 6 3 , 368
Rukmi!J.i
sends message to Kr !J.a, 350,
354
kidnapped by Kr !J.a, 3 55-3 6 1
prays for her b rother & in-
382 Kr  a, the Supre me Pe rs o nalit_y of G odhead
structed by Balarama, 365-
368
marriage of, 369-370
Pradyumna b orn to, 3 7 1 -375
Rupa Gosvami, 2 1 , 145, 1 9 2 , 209
Sambara D emon, 3 7 1 -374
Sandipani Muni
instructs Kr  a & Balarama,
285-288
son of, recovered, 288-289
Sankhasura, 229-230
Separation, feeling of, 2 3 1 -235,
304-3 1 0
Sisupala, 349 -363
Sudama (florist), 264-265
Tg1avarta, 5 3-54
Uddhava
with Nanda & Y asoda, 293-
296
with gopis, 296-3 1 3
Ugrasena
imprisoned, 8
made king by Kr  a, 282-283
Varu a, 1 84- 185
Vasudeva
pacifies Kamsa , 4-6
prayers to Kr  a, 25-28
meeting with Nanda Maha
raja, 40-42
consoled by Kr  a , 281 -282
V atsasura, 77
Vidyadhara, 225-229
Vi  u
manifestation before L ord
Brahma, 9 2-9 3
as birthsite of Brahma, 1 0 1
appears within Yam una, 255-
256
Visvamitra Muni , 245
Vrndavana
cowherd men move to, 75-77
trees of, 1 5 6
inhabitants saved from flood,
1 73 - 1 76
process to reach, 248
Vyomasura, 242-243
Woman , duty of, 1 9 6 - 1 9 8
Y amaraja, 289
Yasoda
prays for Kr  a 's protection,
46-47
sees universal form, 6 1 -62
binding Kr  a, 64-66
& Uddhava, 294
Y ogamaya
appears in Vrndavana, 1 0- l l
appears before Kamsa, 3 3
influence of, 28 1
Yogis
bhak ti-, desti nation of, 1 8 6
gopis the highest, 1 9 2 , 2 7 6 ,
306-308
Note on Transliterated Sanskrit Words 383
The vowels are pronounced almost as in Italian. The sound of the ·
short a is like . the u in but, the long a is like the a in far and held
twice as long as the short a, and e is like the a in evade. Long i is like
the i in pique. The vowel r is pronounced like the re in the English
word fibre. The c is pronounced as in the-English word chair, and the
aspirated consonants (ch, jh, dh, etc.) are pronounced as in staunch
heart, hedge-hog, red-hot, etc. The two spirants s and f are pronounced
Jike the English sh; s is pronounced · as in sun.

Other Books by :\.C. BhaktiH dant.a   ami
The 'ectar of Oe,·otion
This book is especially mtended for
those who are engaged in the   !la
consciousness mm·ement. The ex-t is
flooded with nectarean storie . philo=-<>phy
and poetic verse about  !la and His
pure devotees-all taken directly fr•Jm the
Vedic literatures. It is a  ummlll") 5tudy of
Bhakti-rasiimrta-sindh u . which w • written
in Sanskrit by Srila Riipa Go ' ami. the
chief of the six direct disciple  of Lord
Caitanya Mahiiprabhu.
The subject matter is love of God. The
Nectar of Devotion teach where to
place our love so that all can become
happy and instructs how to love the
ultimate reservoir of lm·e.  :;-!Ja. in five
different transcendental mellow .
404 pp. 4 full-color plate:.. "oftbound.
$3.95
The Bhagand-gita & It Is
:\" ow for the first time this renowned
scripture is being brought to the " .. st as it
u- as taught by l<fl}!la Himself and under
stood by His disciple Arjuna-in a unique
translation and com mentar.·.
From the Introduction : "The perplexi
ties of life appear like a forest fire which
takes place without being set by anyone.
The man in material perplexitie  is he who
does not understand the problems of life .
Out of many many human beings. the
Bhagavad-gitii is directed to the one who
seeks to understand his position . "
318 pp., softbound $2.95
Teachings of Lord Caitanya
A Treatue on Factual "piritual Life
Lord Caitanya, the most munificent incar
nation of Godhead, appeared 500 years
ago to demonstrate how to live the
teachings of Bhagavad-gitii in the present
age. Lord Caitanya was famous as a
scholar and spoke authoritatively on Kn!Ja,
yoga, liberation and nirvii!la. Still, He is
better known as the divine origin of the
Hare Kr  ·a movement, distributing love of
God simply by singing the holy names.
292 pp., 1 1 pp. illus. ; hardbound $5.95
Available from ISKCON Pre ·
38 N. Beacon St., Boston, Massach usetts
H is Divi ne Grace A. C. B haktivedanta Swam i Prab h u pada